מרומם הוא אלהין בקדמיתא ובתריתא, די צבי ואתרעי בן ומסר לן אוריתא, די זכינא לסימא ספרא דצניעותא. כען נרים ידנא, קדם אלהנא, די יעמד לנא לימינא, להתחיל ולגמר רזין עלאין הגנוזים בסבי דבי אתונא.



Short Poetic Conclusion to Torahs 19-22 on Safra DiTzneyusa and Preface to Torahs 23-31 on Suvay Divay Atuna

Exalted is the G-d, before the first and after the last [Akdamut Milin, Shavuot liturgy],
Who desired and delighted in us and gave us the Torah [Akdamut Milin, Shavuot liturgy; cf. Deuteronomy 33:4],
By which we merited to complete Safra DiTzneyusa [The Book of Modesty or Concealment].
Now we shall raise our hands before our G-d [cf. Psalms 134:2],
That He may stand at our right hand [cf. Psalms 16:8],
To begin and complete the lofty secrets hidden in Suvay Divay Atuna [The Elders of the House of Atuna, Bechoros 8b]. 

Notes on Translation and References:

"Exalted is the G-d, before the first and after the last": The Aramaic "מרומם הוא אלהין בקדמיתא ובתריתא" echoes the opening of Akdamut Milin, the Shavuot liturgical poem, praising G-d’s eternal sovereignty before creation and beyond its end.

"Who desired and delighted in us and gave us the Torah": The Aramaic "די צבי ואתרעי בן ומסר לן אוריתא" draws from Akdamut Milin, celebrating G-d’s favor toward Israel and the giving of the Torah, with a secondary allusion to Deuteronomy 33:4.

"By which we merited to complete Safra DiTzneyusa": The Aramaic "די זכינא לסימא ספרא דצניעותא" indicates the completion of Torahs 19-22, based on Safra DiTzneyusa (The Book of Modesty or Concealment), a Zoharic text of profound Kabbalistic significance.

"Now we shall raise our hands before our G-d": The Aramaic "כען נרים ידנא קדם אלהנא" draws from Psalms 134:2, symbolizing a prayerful posture of devotion and supplication.

"That He may stand at our right hand": The Aramaic "די יעמד לנא לימינא" echoes Psalms 16:8, invoking divine support and guidance for the next teachings.

"To begin and complete the lofty secrets hidden in Suvay Divay Atuna": The Aramaic "להתחיל ולגמר רזין עלאין הגנוזים בסבי דבי אתונא" introduces Torahs 23-31, based on the sayings of the Elders of the House of Atuna in Bechoros 8b, which contain lofty, hidden Kabbalistic secrets. The term refers to elders who gathered in Atuna, possibly Athens or an attic, to debate Rabbi Yehoshua, as explained in the very beginning of the translation of Torah 23.

Context of Safra DiTzneyusa and Suvay Divay Atuna: Torahs 19-22 conclude the teachings on Safra DiTzneyusa, a Zoharic text exploring concealed divine mysteries. Torahs 23-31 shift to the sayings of Suvay Divay Atuna (The Elders of the House of Atuna) in Bechoros 8b, continuing the exploration of mystical narratives and their spiritual significance.

