הפעם נודה את ה' בגילה ברנה, אשר זכינו לסים סבי דבי אתונא, דברים הסתומים וחתומים באלף עזקאין אין חכמה ואין תבונה, וגם אם יאמר החכם לדעת לא יוכל למצא נלעג לשון אין בינה, נתיב לא ידעו עיט ולא שזפתו עינא, מה אדבר והוא אמר ועשה אזנים לתורה הצפונה, עתה כפינו פרושות אל ה' בבקשה ותפלה ותחנה. ה' יגמר בעדנו להדפיס יתר המאמרים הנוראים, אשר גלה בהם דרכי עבודתו יתברך בדרכים נפלאים, עמודי שש מיסדים על אדני פז על כל פסוקי תנ"ך ועל כל דברי התנאים ואמוראים, גלילי זהב כתרשיש ממלאים, מפנינים יקרים ומפז מסלאים, בזכותם נזכה ללמד וללמד לשמר ולעשות ולקים את כל דברי תורתך אשר קבלנו מפי אדון כל הנביאים, וקים במהרה בימינו ועל בהר ציון מושיעים. אמן, כן יהיה רצון. 





Short Poetic Conclusion to Torahs 23-31 on Suvay Divay Atuna and Preface to Likutay Moharan Torahs 32 Onward

This time we shall thank the L-rd with joy and song [cf. Psalms 95:2],
For we have merited to complete Suvay Divay Atuna [The Elders of the House of Atuna, Bechoros 8b],
Words sealed and concealed with a thousand chains, where there is no wisdom nor understanding [cf. Proverbs 8:14; Daniel 12:10],
And even if the wise claims to know, he cannot find; the tongue of mockery lacks understanding [cf. Ecclesiastes 8:17; Proverbs 1:6],
A path unknown to the vulture, unseen by the eye [cf. Job 28:7],
What shall I speak, for He has spoken and made ears for the hidden Torah [cf. Job 33:16].
Now our hands are spread out to the L-rd in supplication, prayer, and entreaty [cf. Psalms 143:6].
May the L-rd complete for us the printing of the remaining awesome sayings,
In which He revealed the ways of His worship, blessed be He, through wondrous paths [cf. Psalms 77:14],
Pillars of marble founded on bases of fine gold, upon all the verses of Tanakh and all the words of the Tanna’im and Amora’im [cf. Song of Songs 5:15; Esther 1:6],
Scrolls of gold like Tarshish, overflowing,
More precious than pearls, refined from fine gold [cf. Lamentations 4:2; Psalms 19:11],
By their merit, may we merit to teach and learn, to observe, perform, and fulfill all the words of Your Torah,
Which we received from the mouth of the master of all prophets [cf. Deuteronomy 34:10],
And establish it swiftly in our days, with saviors upon Mount Zion [cf. Obadiah 1:21].
Amen, may it be His will. 

Notes on Translation and References:

"This time we shall thank the L-rd with joy and song": The Hebrew "הפעם נודה את ה' בגילה ברנה" echoes Psalms 95:2, invoking gratitude and joyful praise to G-d.

"For we have merited to complete Suvay Divay Atuna": The Hebrew "אשר זכינו לסים סבי דבי אתונא" refers to the completion of Torahs 23-31, based on the sayings of the Elders of the House of Atuna in Bechoros 8b, where elders gathered in an attic to discuss divine wisdom, as noted in the introduction to Torah 23 on the NaNach blog https://naanaach.blogspot.com/search/label/Lkm%2023.

"Words sealed and concealed with a thousand chains, where there is no wisdom nor understanding": The Hebrew "דברים הסתומים וחתומים באלף עזקאין אין חכמה ואין תבונה" draws from Proverbs 8:14 and Daniel 12:10, emphasizing the esoteric and sealed nature of these teachings.

"And even if the wise claims to know, he cannot find; the tongue of mockery lacks understanding": The Hebrew "וגם אם יאמר החכם לדעת לא יוכל למצא נלעג לשון אין בינה" reflects Ecclesiastes 8:17 and Proverbs 1:6, highlighting the limits of human wisdom and the folly of mockery.

"A path unknown to the vulture, unseen by the eye": The Hebrew "נתיב לא ידעו עיט ולא שזפתו עינא" quotes Job 28:7, describing the inaccessibility of divine wisdom to earthly perception.

"What shall I speak, for He has spoken and made ears for the hidden Torah": The Hebrew "מה אדבר והוא אמר ועשה אזנים לתורה הצפונה" alludes to Job 33:16, suggesting G-d opens ears to perceive hidden Torah insights.

"Now our hands are spread out to the L-rd in supplication, prayer, and entreaty": The Hebrew "עתה כפינו פרושות אל ה' בבקשה ותפלה ותחנה" echoes Psalms 143:6, expressing a posture of prayerful supplication.

"May the L-rd complete for us the printing of the remaining awesome sayings": The Hebrew "ה' יגמר בעדנו להדפיס יתר המאמרים הנוראים" is a prayer for divine assistance in continuing to publish the teachings of Likutay Moharan.

"In which He revealed the ways of His worship, blessed be He, through wondrous paths": The Hebrew "אשר גלה בהם דרכי עבודתו יתברך בדרכים נפלאים" reflects Psalms 77:14, emphasizing the wondrous paths of divine service revealed in Torahs 32 onward.

"Pillars of marble founded on bases of fine gold, upon all the verses of Tanakh and all the words of the Tanna’im and Amora’im": The Hebrew "עמודי שש מיסדים על אדני פז על כל פסוקי תנ"ך ועל כל דברי התנאים ואמוראים" draws from Song of Songs 5:15 and Esther 1:6, symbolizing the teachings’ foundation in scripture and rabbinic tradition.

"Scrolls of gold like Tarshish, overflowing, more precious than pearls, refined from fine gold": The Hebrew "גלילי זהב כתרשיש ממלאים, מפנינים יקרים ומפז מסלאים" echoes Lamentations 4:2 and Psalms 19:11, portraying the teachings as precious and abundant treasures.

"By their merit, may we merit to teach and learn, to observe, perform, and fulfill all the words of Your Torah": The Hebrew "בזכותם נזכה ללמד וללמד לשמר ולעשות ולקים את כל דברי תורתך" reflects the aspiration to fulfill the Torah through study and practice.

"Which we received from the mouth of the master of all prophets": The Hebrew "אשר קבלנו מפי אדון כל הנביאים" alludes to Deuteronomy 34:10, referring to Moses as the greatest prophet.

"And establish it swiftly in our days, with saviors upon Mount Zion": The Hebrew "וקים במהרה בימינו ועל בהר ציון מושיעים" quotes Obadiah 1:21, praying for messianic redemption.

Context of Suvay Divay Atuna and Torahs 32 Onward: Torahs 23-31 conclude the teachings on Suvay Divay Atuna (The Elders of the House of Atuna) in Bechoros 8b, exploring mystical narratives. Torahs 32 onward in Likutay Moharan shift to diverse teachings without a single thematic source, encompassing practical and esoteric guidance for divine service.

