240 - All the influences and all the things come only from the true tzadik

All the influences [divine flows or abundances] and all the things come only from the true tzadik [righteous one, source of divine bounty]. And therefore, when one draws near to the true tzadik, he can receive easily what he needs, whether wealth or children. But when he is far from the tzadik, then it comes to him with great difficulty, because each one receives wealth or children according to his mazal [fortune, astrological destiny or personal providence], and the mazal receives the influence from the tzadik, because from there come all the influences. And therefore, when he is far from the tzadik, then the mazal needs to exert great power [immense effort] for him in order to receive the influence from the tzadik, because he is far from him. And therefore, there are many differences in this. Sometimes wealth reaches a person and he dies from this, and the wealth remains for the heirs. And sometimes he dies through receiving wealth, and he also loses the wealth. And similarly, many differences. And this is like, for example, when one wants to lift a heavy load and he puts all his power to lift the load because it is very heavy. And sometimes he lifts the load, but because of the greatness of the power that he put into this, his bowels are uprooted and torn within him until he dies because of this. But it can be that even so the load remains in his hand. And sometimes, because his inside is torn, the load also falls from his hand. It is found that this one died because he lifted the load and also the load did not remain with him even for his sons. Similarly in the above, because the mazal needs to exert great power for him in order to receive from the tzadik the influence because he is far from him, because of this it can be several differences as above. But one who draws near to the tzadik, then the mazal does not need to exert power for him because he is near to him. But with all this, sometimes it can be that a person draws near to the true tzadik and through this loses the wealth. Know that this is because he sees a thing precious very high [a highly valuable spiritual matter]. And even though he himself does not see, his mazal sees [Megillah 3a Talmudic reference to subconscious perception]. And because the mazal sees a precious and elevated thing very much, through this it casts the wealth from him, like one who carries a load of copper and sees gold and good stones and precious ones, then he casts everything and runs and grabs the precious things. Similarly because he drew near and sees precious more than fine gold and than pearls, then the mazal casts the wealth as if behind the hand [disregards it casually], all the more so when he merits that he also feels in himself that the drawing near to the tzadik is precious more than all the wealth in the world, then certainly he does not pay attention to money and does not want wealth at all.

