245 - Know that there are chambers of Torah

Know that there are chambers of Torah [mystical inner rooms or levels of Torah revelation]. And one who merits them when he begins to innovate in the Torah [reveal new insights], he enters the chambers and enters from chamber to chamber and from chamber to chamber because in every chamber and chamber there are several several doors to other chambers. And similarly from those chambers to other chambers. And he enters and strolls in all of them, and gathers from there treasures and segulot [remedies or virtues] precious and very desirable. Happy is his portion. But know, that one needs to be careful very much, not to err in himself, because not quickly do they merit this because there are several several innovations that do not come from there only from the halls of exchanges [counterfeit realms of impurity mimicking holiness] because this opposite this G-d made [Ecclesiastes 7:14, good and evil parallels]. And even though it seems to the person as a great attainment even so, also there there are innovations nice that seem as attainments. And also in this there are several aspects like for example when they write word Adam they know that this hints at the image of the man but it is only in hint in general because there is not written there any drawing of the man. And there is that they draw on the paper the drawing of the man, and there is revealed more a little the image of the man. And there is that they saw [carve] the drawing of the man from a piece of wood and there is revealed still more the drawing of the man. But even so this is not the man actually only the man himself is the man in truth. Similarly there are several innovations of Torah that they are only like a notebook and like that they write the word Adam alone because the Torah is the aspect of Adam, as it is written: “This is the Torah Adam” [Numbers 19:14 "This is the law when a man dies"]. And there is that he enters inside from this but even so this is not Adam as above only when they merit to the Torah itself this is the aspect of Adam in truth. And this is “This is the Torah Adam” this the Torah precisely that is only this the true Torah, is the aspect of Adam. And know that every person before he attains in the Torah an attainment of truth needs to go necessarily through these halls of exchanges. But the rule that it is forbidden to err in himself to think that already he came to the proper attainment because if he thinks so he will remain there G-d forbid. But when he knows that still he has not begun to enter the true chambers of Torah then he will strengthen in the service of Hashem, and increase in prayers, and implore until they open for him the gates of holiness in truth, and then he will see the difference. And even if he did fasts and mortifications and afflictions for the sake of Hashem blessed be He and after that merited to innovations even so he should not stand on this to think that they are attainments of truth the above because even for the semblances of the halls of exchanges one needs fasts and mortifications. And even in lusts of this world there is an example to this like for example when they make a joke and comedy then one travels and announces and thinks all the things that they will do on the comedy. And even though it is a lust to hear even so this is not the joke itself. And similarly when he comes to the chamber where they make the comedy there is drawn on the board all the things that they will do there. And also this is not the thing itself. And even when they come there inside, one jester stands, and does like the act of a monkey and all the things that the master of comedy does, he does after him in jest. And also this is not the thing itself. And the main is the joke itself that they do there. Similarly understand the parable from itself because there is one who seems to him that he enters inside, and inside and inside and still stands outside completely, because he has not begun to attain an attainment of truth. And the very great tzadik even when he merits to attain great attainments of holiness in truth even so they are not considered in his eyes as anything because of the greatness of the essence of his recognition of the greatness of the Creator blessed be He. Therefore he strives and strengthens each time that Hashem blessed be He begins to show him the light of the Torah as if he has not begun to attain at all from his days.

