260 - The Name is the soul

The Name is the soul as is explained in the Torah Heichal HaKodesh [in sign 59, "living soul is his name" [Genesis 2:7] see there]. And there is in this aspect self-sacrifice. For there are ten martyrs of the kingdom [famous Jewish martyrs] who sacrificed their souls for the sanctification of the Name for the unification of the Holy One blessed be He and His Shechinah as is known that the main unification is through self-sacrifice. And they saw in those generations that it is impossible to repair and to make unifications above except through their souls. Therefore they sacrificed their souls for the sanctification of the Name. For when the souls ascend above through self-sacrifice then they return to the Shechinah, for from there they came out. For Israel are portion of G-d from above actually that they are portions of the Shechinah actually in aspect of "The laden from the womb" [Isaiah 46:3]. And when they return to the Shechinah then the Shechinah boasts see in what son I am coming to you [Zohar Vayikra 13a]. And then is aroused upper longing and unification is made as is known. And sometimes it comes for need this killing, G-d forbid that are killed, G-d forbid, several several souls from Israel in order that there be unification through their souls that ascend above. For sometimes need for the unification many souls very, G-d forbid. Therefore comes killing, G-d forbid. And similarly through loss of the Name, that is the famous that is, that there is one that is famous and is not famous, that is, that he is famous in mouth of all and all speak from him and even so is not famous, because he is not considered at all. And there is one that does not desire in this, only that he lost the famous that is loss of the Name that is even though not his will that not be famous even so lost it like person loses thing not in his will, that is, that lost the Name, that aspect of famous that has name in the world. But there is one that does this in his will and in his knowledge that sacrifices his soul for sanctification of the Name that is his famous, that aspect of name as above, that aspect of soul as above. And because of this even though he is famous even so he is not famous at all, for on the contrary he is opposite, for all speak against him, and invent against him lies that not arose on his mind. And has to him bloodshed actually from this. And does this in intention, because it is aspect of self-sacrifice actually because the Name is the soul as above, and also has to him bloodshed from this as above. And he saves Israel in this from what was proper to come upon them G-d forbid, for the unification as above. And through sacrifice of his name that is his soul as above he saves them as above.

