Likutey Moharan 154

Know that there exist fallen fears

Know that there exist fallen fears. And all the sufferings and judgments that a person experiences — all of them stem from fallen fears that descended into the particular matter which he fears and from which he suffers.

As it says in Shabbat 77b: “Five types of fear: the fear of the weak over the strong.” That even though this is against the natural order — that the strong should fear the weak — nevertheless, this comes from the upper fear that has fallen and become clothed in these matters.

And therefore, they are enumerated as five — corresponding to the five gevurot (powers of judgment), which are the five final double letters: מ, נ, צ, פ, ך (מנצפ"ך).

And one must elevate these fallen fears, to return them to their root and their place. And the place of fear is in the heart, as Rashi explains [on Leviticus 19:14]: “A matter that is entrusted to the heart of a person, it is said regarding it: ‘And you shall fear.’”

And fear must be with knowledge (da’at), for without knowledge it is written: “Is not your fear your folly?” [Job 4:6]. And knowledge must be in the heart — for even a gentile possesses knowledge, but it is without a heart. As it is written: “And you shall know today and return it to your heart” [Deuteronomy 4:39], and likewise: “But the Lord did not give you a heart to know” [Deuteronomy 29:3].

And when one unites the knowledge in the heart with the fear — whose root and place is in the heart — then it is said: “Then you will understand the fear of Hashem and discover the knowledge of God” [Proverbs 2:5].

And behold, it is written: “A king through judgment sustains the land” [Proverbs 29:4]. That is: through judgment, he establishes and elevates the fear — which is an aspect of the land — as it is written: “The earth feared and was still” [Psalms 76:9].

And judgment refers to a person judging and evaluating himself concerning every single action he performs, before they judge him Above. And through his own self-judgment, he is spared from heavenly judgment. For: “When there is judgment below, there is no judgment above” [Midrash Rabbah, Shoftim 5].

And since no judgment is passed upon him [from Above], there is no need for fear to fall and become clothed below; and he requires only the upper fear, the fear of exaltedness.

[See all of this above in the Torah that begins with: “One who desires to taste the taste of the hidden light,” in Siman 15, where all of this is explained at length.]

