205 - Rectification for Nocturnal Emission

Rectification for nocturnal emission, may the Merciful One save us, is to recite ten chapters of Psalms on that very day that it occurred to him, God forbid, because there is power in reciting Psalms to extract the drop from the shell that took it. For Psalms [Tehilim] numerically equals Lilith, including the five letters of her name, as she is appointed over this, as is known. And one must intend during the recitation of Psalms, that Psalms [Tehilim] numerically equals 485, which is aligned with the number of the two Names E-l E-lohim in their full expansion like this: Aleph Lamed Aleph Lamed Hei Yud Mem. Through these two Names, the drop emerges from the shell, because the drop is an aspect of kindness and strength, as is known, for it contains the power of fire and water, warmth and moisture, which are aspects of kindness and strength. And through these two Names E-l E-lohim mentioned above, which are aspects of kindness and strength, as is known, and which numerically equal Psalms as mentioned above, through this, they extract the drop from there. And this is what one must intend during the recitation of Psalms. And therefore, one must recite ten chapters, because there are ten types of song, which are aspects of the ten expressions (-literary styles) that are expressed in the Book of Psalms, as brought (in the Gemara Pesachim 117a and in the Zohar). They are Ashrei, Lamnatzeach, Maskil, Halleluyah, and so on (see in the commentary of Rashi). And there is power in each and every tongue of these ten tongues mentioned above to nullify the power of the shell mentioned above, because each one of these tongues is the opposite of the shell mentioned above. For Ashrei is a tongue of seeing and contemplation, the opposite of the shell mentioned above, whose main power comes from the spoiling of sight, from the aspect of "and his eyes dimmed from seeing," in the aspect of "let there be darkness" missing, and our Rabbis, of blessed memory, expounded (Tikunei Zohar Tikun 44, page 79b): this is Lilith. It is found that her main power is from the spoiling of seeing, and Ashrei, which is an expression of seeing, is the opposite of her. And similarly, Maskil, because she is an aspect of meshakel (causing miscarriage), and Maskil is the opposite of this. And regarding this matter, see elsewhere [above in sign 19], because her main power to cause a person to sin with emission, God forbid, is through the tongue of Targum, which is an aspect of Maskil through the interpreter, who mixes good and evil, sometimes meshakel and sometimes maskil; see there. And similarly, Halleluyah is the opposite of the shell, whose name is Lilith because she howls in howling always, and Hallel is the opposite of yelalah, for the letters of Halleli are the opposite of yelalah. And the rest he did not explain.

Also, the drop comes from the knowledge, which is an aspect of kindness and strength, as is known, because the drop is also an aspect of kindness and strength, as mentioned above. And it is known that the knowledge is an aspect of five kindnesses and five strengths; therefore, one must recite ten chapters. And this is the aspect of (Psalms 32): "To David Maskil, happy is he whose transgression is forgiven" – the initials form Na'af (adultery), which is subdued through the aspect of "to David Maskil," that is, Psalms.

Afterward, our Rabbi, of blessed memory, revealed the ten chapters of Psalms specifically that one must recite them on that day that it happens to him, God forbid, an unclean emission. And these are: Mikhtam to David, 16; To David Maskil, 32; Happy is he who considers the poor, 41; As the deer pants, 42; To the conductor do not destroy, 59; To the conductor on Yedutun, 77; Prayer of Moses, 90; Give thanks to Hashem call on His name, 105; By the rivers of Babylon, 137; Halleluyah praise God in His sanctuary, 150. And he said: that these ten chapters of Psalms are a very, very great rectification for emission, God forbid. And whoever merits to recite them on that day need not fear anymore at all from the awesome damage of the emission, God forbid, because certainly it is rectified through this [and see this matter in Likutei Moharan, second part, at its end].

