250 - All kinds of suffering and all the afflictions are only from lack of knowledge

Know that all kinds of suffering [pain or distress] and all the afflictions [torments] are only from lack of knowledge [awareness or understanding of divine providence], because one who has knowledge and knows that all is under providence from Hashem blessed be He has no afflictions, and does not feel any suffering, because "Hashem gave and Hashem took" [Job 1:21]. And even though there are afflictions that necessarily one feels them, like the afflictions that come because of the composition [physical makeup of body and soul], like afflictions that there are from the departure of the soul from the body, and they are the afflictions of the sick that come because the soul begins to spread [extend or depart] from the body. And because the soul is bound in the body with a tight and strong bond, therefore necessarily one feels the afflictions at the time of separation. Even so the afflictions are very light and easy to accept at the time that he knows with clear knowledge that all is under providence from Hashem blessed be He. And all the more so other kinds of suffering and all afflictions that one does not feel at all when he has knowledge as above. And the main the suffering from the afflictions is from that they take from him the knowledge in order that he will feel the afflictions. And this is the main suffering of Israel that they have in the exile, all is from that they fell from the knowledge and attribute all to nature and to chances and to mazal [fortune], and because of this they have suffering and all afflictions as above. And this comes to them from that they dwell among the idolaters [non-Jews] and learned from them, from that they see their time succeeding very much, and Israel despised and low, therefore they learn from them and attribute all to nature and chance, and because of this itself they have afflictions, because if they had knowledge that all is under providence there would be no afflictions for them at all as above. And in truth Israel they are above nature, only when they sin, G-d forbid, then they fall to under nature like the idolaters that they are under the mazal and nature, and then they have exile and suffering, G-d forbid. And the main suffering and the exile of them is only through this itself that they have no knowledge, and attribute to nature. And when the Holy One blessed be He wants to have mercy on Israel and to save them from their exile, and to make end and finish from the distress for them, then He draws upon them providence and then subdues and nullifies the nature and the mazal that was obligating that Israel be given under their hand, and then obligates the distress for them, and Israel ascend over them through the providence. And know that this providence He draws from the end of the world, because in the future at the time of the end nature will be nullified completely, and there will be only providence alone, as it is written: "For the heavens like smoke will vanish and the earth like a garment will wear out" [Isaiah 51:6], that is, that nature will be nullified that is according to the array of the stars and fortunes, and this vanish, that is, that the fortunes will be confused and mixed, and there will be no fortune, only providence alone. And therefore also now when the Name blessed be He wants to make end and finish from some idolaters and that Israel be above, then He draws upon them providence from end and end of the world that then there will be only providence. And through this providence Israel are elevated and made end and finish from the idolaters that distressed them, and this aspect "End came the end" [Ezekiel 7:2], that is, when the Holy One blessed be He wants to bring end on the idolaters, then He draws providence from the last end as above. And prayer is aspect of providence above nature, because nature obligates thus, and prayer changes nature, and it is aspects great aspect "For who nation great that to him gods close to him like Hashem our G-d in all our calling to Him" [Deuteronomy 4:7], for this our greatness, that the Name blessed be He hears our prayer and changes nature through His providence blessed be He, and as written "Tell now to me the great that Elisha did" [2 Kings 8:4], and as said our rabbis, of blessed memory "And Elisha that with mercy he did" [Megillah 27a]. It is found that prayer that is aspect of miracles and providence opposite nature is aspect of great. And this is what answered Obey Tamya to Rav Ketina [Berachot 59a]. What goha? [earthquake or tremor] At the time that the Holy One blessed be He remembers His sons that they dwell in suffering among the idolaters, drops two tears to the great sea and His voice is heard from end of world to end his, that is, among the idolaters precisely, because this main suffering what they dwell among the idolaters and learned from them and fell from knowledge and attribute to fortune and nature, and this main suffering of them as above. And then drops tears and so forth, that is, He draws upon them providence, because tears are aspects of providence, as said our rabbis, of blessed memory [Shabbat 151a] on verse "And the clouds return after the rain" [Ecclesiastes 12:2], this the sight that goes after the crying. It is found that the tears are taking portion of sight, and the sight is drawn into them. It is found that the tears are portions of the providence and sight, because the tears take the sight as above. And this and drops two tears, that is, He draws portions of providence to the great sea that is aspects of the idolaters ruling over Israel, aspect "And the wicked like the driven sea" [Isaiah 57:20]. And then made aspects great, aspect of providence, aspects of prayer that it is aspect of great as above. And this and His voice is heard from end of the world and to end his, that is, He draws providence from end of the world from the last end to end his, to make end and finish from the idolaters ruling in Israel, aspects end came the end as above. And this aspect of tears that cry at time of suffering, because since he has torments and suffering therefore he needs aspects of providence, to have salvation as above. And therefore drop tears to draw through them portions of providence and sight, because providence and sight is drawn into the tears in aspects "And the clouds return after the rain", this sight that goes after the crying, that is, they diminish sight and take portion from sight. It is found that sight drawn into tears as above. And this aspect "And Hezekiah wept great weeping" [Isaiah 38:3] that is said at time he was sick, great weeping precisely, because drew into the weeping the sight and providence that this aspects great, aspects of prayer and so forth as above. And this what is said about David at time he wept on his suffering "Until David became great" [1 Samuel 30:20 wait, this seems to be a misreference; perhaps 2 Samuel 5:10 or similar, but following text], that his weeping reached aspects of providence aspect of great as above, because through providence saved from all kinds of suffering and torments as above.

