
============================================================
CHAPTER 1: Introduction
============================================================

Hisbodidus

Alone Time

Translated by Simcha Nanach

Na Nach Nachma Nachman MayUman

In memory of the true key bearer of the Breslov tradition

Rabbi Yisrael Dov Odeser o.b.m.

Student of Rabbi Yisrael Karduner o.b.m.

Student of Rabbi Moshe Breslover o.b.m.

Student of Rabbi Nussun of Breslov o.b.m.

Student of the holy master

Rabbi Nachman of Breslov

Na Nach Nachma Nachman Me'uman

______________________________________________________________________

www.BreslovBooks.com

All of Rebbe Nachman's books

at non-profit prices and for free download

"MAL'E VEGADISH" Foundation

Printing and distribution of the books of Rabbi Nachman

Publicizing the Name of the Tzadik  / +972-52-26-26-148

naanaach@gmail.com

naanaach.blogspot.com

youtube.com/ancientlyoung

________________________________________________

Books of Rabbi Nachman of Breslov available in English

Character – The Aleph Bet Book of Traits

The Stories of Rabbi Nachman of Breslov and Saba Yisroel

Outpouring of the Soul

The Fires of Israel

Rabbi Nachman of Breslov: Who He Was and What He Said (included in this book)

Live Up The Good Points – Azamru!

Pray With Your Limbs & Other Devotions of a Nanach

The Praises of Rabbi Nachman

Introduction

Hisbodidus {pronounced: hisboadidoos} literally means to be alone, and it takes on the meaning and function of all things holy that are best, or can only be achieved, alone. Notwithstanding all the noble and critical devotions that occur and are performed during hisbodidus – many of which will be presented in this book, being alone is of itself an end not just a means. G-d Almighty is One, solitaire, alone. The father of all Israel, Abraham, is extolled in Scriptures (Yichezkel 33:24) as being “one,” and in the preface to the second volume of Likutay Moharan (The Collection of (the holy teachings) of Our Master Rabbi Nachman), Rabbi Nachman makes it clear that devotion to G-d begins only from this point where a Jew takes on this attribute of Abraham and can stand alone even against the antagonism and backlash of all his loved ones, family, and the entire world. Rabbi Nachman even explained to little children how ultimately they would be alone in the grave. Rabbi Nachman said that if a person, even one stooped in sin and vice, would be left alone without any influence of others, ultimately the person would come around to be good. Rabbi Nachman taught how each person is like a monarch with his own kingdom, and each person must take responsibility for himself and the entire world. This was a phenomenally novel idea for those times when the Jew was totally downtrodden under very dismal living conditions and almost without rights. Even still Rabbi Nachman expected everyone to realize their own majesty and take control accordingly (3). Today, when most people enjoy full rights and liberties, and are privileged with so many amenities the likes of which may not have even been accorded to former kings, Rabbi Nachman’s teaching radiates with its truth. The mentality and viewpoint of a king is entirely different than that of a commoner. A king must have full knowledge of his kingdom, and he must maintain proper control and management. A king also has entertainers. A king must have time for himself, especially in private gardens and nature reserves. All these properties and more, Rabbi Nachman wanted every person to achieve and maintain. Rabbi Nachman belittled the shlimazel (-good for nothing), he demanded that people take control of their lives, for and by themselves. Rabbi Nachman demands that a person have complete financial independence and not need anyone’s approval of any sort for anything. Rabbi Nachman warned very strongly against all the contemporary rabbis, and this was not only due to their fraud, and corruption, and bad advice, but because he expected every person to take stock and be their own man, and not be reliant on anyone. Rabbi Nachman himself rarely told anyone what to do, at best he would give a suggestion, some type of advice with a direction, and there are documented stories of when Rabbi Nachman did tell people what to do, fully hoping and expecting them to challenge what he told them! All of this needs to be expounded upon properly in its proper place, for here we will just take out the point that hisbodidus, which is one of the most fundamental features of Breslov, isn’t just a means to be able to work on proper devotion of Hashem, hisbodidus is intrinsically and innately an attribute which must be acquired. Thus Rabbi Nachman said it is extremely beneficial just to sit in hisbodidus even if one is unsuccessful to do anything then, and ultimately one should be able to be in a state of hisbodidus even when surrounded by multitudes of people, and even when interacting with them!

Rabbi Nachman said (Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman, article 107) that in his youth, every time he would return from doing hisbodidus the world looked completely new. This is also an aspect of mastery, because the heightened understanding gained over the world, is new acquisition and secures dominion over it in an even more elevated state (of the world).

This book is a selection of teachings pertaining to hisbodidus taken from the holy awesome book Likutay Aitzoas – A Collection of Remedies/Advice.

Outpouring of the Soul, to provide the reader with some of the basics about hisbodidus (however there is much more there which didn’t make it into this book), and prayers pertaining hisbodidus taken from Likutay Tifeeloas (Collection of Prayers) authored by Rabbi Nussun based on the teachings of Likutay Moharan.

Na Nach Nachma Nachman MayUman

1

Hisbodidus

Outpouring of the Soul, article 2

Hisbodidus is a great virtue, higher than everything. Namely, to set for himself, in any case, an hour or more to do hisbodidus alone by himself in any room or in the field, and to express his words between himself and his Creator, with arguments and reasoning, with words of charm, and endearment, and appeasement, to beseech and entreat before Him Blessed He, that He should draw him close to Him, to His service, in truth. And this prayer and conversing should be in the spoken language, that is, in our country, in Yiddish ("lushon Ashkenaz", today this can very readily refer to English vernacular), for in the Holy Tongue it is difficult for him to express all he has to say, and also the heart is not drawn after the words because he isn't accustomed so much to speaking in that language, for it isn't our practice to speak in the Holy Tongue. Whereas in Yiddish, which is spoken and used in conversation, it is easily and much more readily spoken, for the heart is drawn and closer to Yiddish because he is fluent in it. And in Yiddish he can express all his words, and everything that is on his heart he should converse and tell over before Him Blessed He, be it regret and repentance on the past, and be it a pleading request to merit to truly draw close to Him Blessed He from today onwards, and so forth, every person according to his level.

And he should be very vigilant to accustom himself to be diligent with this every day, for one designated hour as mentioned above, and the entire rest of the day to be joyous (as it is written in the previous article (i.e. Likutay Moharan vol. 2, Torah 24) which begins: It is a great mitzvah to always be joyous). And this practice is very extremely great in stature, and it is a way and an extremely beneficial aitza (advice/remedy) to draw close to Him Blessed He, for this is a general aitza, which includes everything, for whatever he is missing in the service of Hashem, or if he is altogether completely distant from His service Blessed He, for everything he should express his words, and request from Him Blessed He, as mentioned above. And even if sometimes his words are suppressed and he absolutely cannot open his mouth to speak before Him Blessed He, even still, this itself is extremely good, namely the preparation that he is ready and standing before Him Blessed He, and desires and yearns to speak, even though he is unable, this itself is also extremely good. And he can also make from this itself, a conversation and prayer, and over this itself he can scream and plead before Him Blessed He, that he has become so distance to the extent that he can't even speak. And he should beseech from Him Blessed He mercy and compassion, that He should have mercy on him and open his mouth so that he can express his words before Him Blessed He.

And know that many, many great and famous tzaddikim told over, that they didn't come to their level, only through this practice. And one who is intelligent will understand for himself the great eminence of this practice, which reaches very far above, and it is something equal for everyone, from little to big, because everyone is able to practice this practice, and through this they will come to a great height (/quality), fortunate is the one who adheres to this.

It is also good to make from the Torah (-holy teachings), prayer, that is, when one learns or hears any homily of Torah from the true tzaddik, then he should make a prayer from this, that is, to request and plead before Him Blessed He regarding everything that was discussed there in that homily, when will he also merit to achieve all of this, and how far he is from this, and he should ask from Him Blessed He that He should merit him to come to everything that was discussed there in that homily.

And one who is intelligent and desires truth, Hashem will lead him in a true way, and he will understand for himself, one thing from another, how to practice this in such a way that his words will be words of grace and correct arguments to gain His will Blessed He, that He draw him close to His service in truth. And the matter of this conversing reaches a place extremely high up, and especially when he makes from Torah, prayer, from this is made enormous delights above (Likutay Moharan vol. 2, Torah 25).

See in the book "Ulim Litrufa" ("Leaves for Healing", letters written by Rabbi Nussun, Letter 397) what is written there: And the main thing is to make from the Torahs, prayers. To beseech every day, and to express his words before Him Blessed He according to whichever Torah he is learning in his (Rabbi Nachman's) holy books, for in all of them he can find himself every day. Aah, Hashem! When will we merit to this? For all our days are flying and passing as a passing shadow, and like a dissipating cloud, and like a rushing wind, and like a fleeting dream (from the liturgy of the High Holidays, "Oonisaneh Toakef") etc.. And we don't have the wherewithal to grab them and hold on to them, so that they stay set up for us, that we live in them forever, just through prayer and entreaty. And the main thing is, through this holy way, which is old and very new, which is to make from the Torahs, prayers, as mentioned above. And it appears to everyone, in their own eyes, that they are far from this, but in truth this is not so, "for this matter is very close to you, with your mouth and your heart to do it (Deuteronomy 30:14)." And if even still, one is unable to begin speaking at all, behold we have spoken a great deal about this as well, with true aitzoas (advice/remedies) which are proven and tested, which have already helped us profusely etc.. Fortunate are we that we have merited to hear all this, and to engage a little in this. Who would give that we merit to truly fulfill His will and go in all His ways, to be joyous everyday, and to beseech and scream to Hashem, and to make from the Torahs, prayers etc., see there (see at the end of this book, the awesome discourse from the book Likutay Halachos, Orach Chaim, laws of Rosh Chodesh, law 5, which is based on these two homilies presented above in article 1 and article 2).

2

Crying in Prayer

Outpouring of the Soul, article 3

And regarding the matter of hisbodidus, and conversing between oneself and his Maker, and the recital of Psalms, and entreaties, and supplications, it is very good when one merits to say them with a truly whole heart, until he merits to cry before Hashem Yisburach like a son who cries before his father. However, he said, that when a person says Psalms, and entreaties, and supplications, and he thinks in his heart and anticipates crying, this thought isn't good, and it also confuses his mind, for because of this he isn't able to say the requests with a completely whole heart. For it is necessary when saying entreaties and supplications, to distant from oneself all types of exterior thoughts of the world, just to concentrate one's mind on the words that he is speaking before Hashem Yisburach, like a person speaks to his friend, and then naturally his heart will be aroused readily until he comes to a truly profound crying.

But when he thinks about this and anticipates crying, then this (-the attempt to cry) and this (-the concentration on the prayer) will be unsuccessful. For the very reciting gets mixed up through this, as mentioned above. For this, that he is thinking and awaiting to cry, is also a form of foreign thoughts that confuse the kavana (concentration), because through this he cannot hear well what he is saying. For, the main thing is to speak the words in truth before Hashem Yisburach, without any extraneous thoughts whatsoever, as mentioned above, and if he merits to cry in truth, wonderful, and if not, not. And he should not confuse his speech for this, as mentioned above (Likutay Moharan vol. 2, Torah 95).

3

Adherence to Hisbodidus

Outpouring of the Soul, article 4

In addition, he said about hisbodidus – for his way, of blessed memory, was to encourage this very much, to be very accustomed to doing hisbodidus, to express one's words before Hashem Yisburach every single day – and he said, that even if one is unable to speak at all, even the utterance of a single word is also extremely good. And he said, that even if one cannot speak, only one word, he should have strong resolve to say that word many, many times, without limit or bounds. And even if he spends many many days with this word alone, this is also good. And he should be strong and emboldened, and profuse to speak that word countless times, until Hashem Yisburach has mercy on him and opens his mouth, and he is able to express his words.

And he said, that speech has enormous power, for behold it is possible to whisper (an incantation) on a gun so that it can't fire, understand (this). And at that time, when he spoke about this, he spoke a lot about hisbodidus, and he spoke at great length in a wondrous talk, with all types of expressions, and he strengthened and exhorted us very, very much in this, to strengthen ourselves to profuse in hisbodidus and conversing between one and his Maker. And he said that he desires that we have the whole entire day for hisbodidus, to spend the entire day on this, except not everyone is able to fulfill this. Therefore it is incumbent to instruct them that in any case they should have some hours for hisbodidus, because this is also good. However someone who's heart is strong in this, and desires to truly accept upon himself the yoke of His service blessed He, he (Rabbi Nachman) desires that he (this person) should have the entire day for hisbodidus. And he mentioned then the homily of our Sages o.b.m. (Brachos 21), if only a person would pray the whole entire day (Likutay Moharan vol. 2, Torah 96).

4

Original prayer is a new undetected secure route to Hashem Yisburach

Outpouring of the Soul, article 5

In addition I heard in his name, that he said regarding the eminence of conversing between oneself and his Maker; for (of) the prayers, and entreaties, and supplications that were already standardized, they are already known to all the destructive forces and prosecutors, and they wait in ambush on the ways of these prayers, because they are already familiar with them. Just like for example, a well trodden road which is known and familiar to everyone, the murderers and thieves always wait in ambush there, because they already know of this road. But when going on a new path and road, which are still unknown, there they do not know to ambush (there) at all. Similarly with the matter at hand, because the conversing that a person speaks from himself, between him and his Maker, is a new way and a new prayer that the person is saying new from his heart, therefore the prosecutors aren't very prevalent to ambush. And even still, he also very much admonished regarding the reciting of other entreaties and supplications, as is explicated in our words many times (Likutay Moharan vol. 2, Torah 97).

5

Speech has great power of arousal

Outpouring of the Soul, article 6

In addition he said regarding the matter of encouragement to do hisbodidus, and entreaties, and supplications, that the spoken word has great power to arouse a person, even though it appears to the person that he doesn't have any heart, even still when he speaks a great deal of words of arousal, and entreaties, and supplications, and so forth, this itself that he is speaking, is a revelation of his heart's and his soul's arousal for Hashem Yisburach, in the aspect of (Song of Songs 5:6), "My soul went out when he spoke," that the speaking itself is a manifestation of the soul and the heart. And sometimes through speaking a lot, even though it will be without any heart at all, even still, afterwards through this he will come to great arousal with heart and soul. And the general principle is, that the speaking itself has a great power (Likutay Moharan vol. 2, Torah 98).

6

Speak out your very soul, and Gd is right there listening

Outpouring of the Soul, article 7

He said, that the main hisbodidus and conversing between one and his Maker in completion, is when one expresses his words so much before Hashem Yisburach until he is very close to expiring his soul Heaven forbid, until he is about to die Heaven forbid, until his nishuma (-soul) isn't bound to his body, only by a thread, from his utter loss, and yearning, and longing for Hashem Yisburach in truth. And so it is clarified in the words of our Rabbis o.b.m. (Taanis 8a) who said, a person's prayer isn't heeded unless he places his soul in his palm, that is as mentioned above. And he said, behold, when Hashem Yisburach helps in hisbodidus, one can express his words before Hashem Yisburach like a person speaks with his friend. And one needs to accustom himself to speak with Hashem Yisburach like he speaks with his Rabbi and with his friend, for (Isaiah 6:3), "the entire world is filled with His glory," and Hashem Yisburach exists everywhere.

(Likutay Moharan vol. 2, Torah 99)

7

The level one attains is achieved through hisbodidus

Outpouring of the Soul, article 8

They told over to me that he said, that from little to big, it is impossible to be a truly kosher person except through doing hisbodidus. And he mentioned many, many famous true tzaddikim, and said, that all of them did not come to their (high) level except through hisbodidus. And he also took (for example) a simple person who was from the progeny of the Baal Shem Tov za.tza.l., and he said, also this (person) expresses his words at all times before Hashem Yisburach with great crying. And he said, that the progeny of the Baal Shem Tov are exceedingly regular at this, for they are the progeny of King David r.i.p., and the whole occupation of David was this affair, that he would very much break his heart before Hashem Yisburach always, for this is the main (-way it came about) Book of Psalms that he founded, as is explained elsewhere (See Likutay Moharan vol. 2, Torah 101, Words of Rabbi Nachman article 68).

(Likutay Moharan vol. 2, Torah 100)

8

Encouragement to Persist and Persevere

Outpouring of the Soul, article 9 – half way through.

For the main principle, and root, and foundation of all the aitzoas (advice/remedies) to draw close to Hashem Yisburach is just the recital of Psalms and other entreaties, and supplications, and hisbodidus, to express one's words between himself and his Creator, to request from before Him, that He should draw him close to His service Blessed He, and just through this one merits to win the battle; if he will be very strong and emboldened always to plead persistently, and to pray, and to entreat before Hashem Yisburach constantly, come what may, then certainly he will win the battle. Fortunate is he. Thus was what we understood from the words of Rabbainu o.b.m..

For even though there are many good aitzoas (advice/remedies) to be found in the books of Rabbainu o.b.m., which are full of aitzoas to draw close to Hashem Yisburach, even still, in most cases it is difficult for a person to carry out the remedy itself. Therefore the main thing is prayer, and entreaty, and supplication. Come what may, no matter what, one should speak verbally in whatever condition, and he should beseech from Hashem Yisburach constantly that He should take him out from the darkness to the light, and He should return him in truly complete repentance, and not give remittance until He answers him. And even though he calls and screams to Hashem Yisburach for the longest time, and he still is very, very distant, even still, if he will be strong and bold with prayers and supplications, certainly without doubt Hashem Yisburach will answer him, and He will draw him close to His service in truth, certainly without doubt. Just be strong and courageous, as our Rabbis o.b.m. said (Brachos 32a), that prayer needs encouragement, as it says (Psalms 27:14), "Hope to Hashem, be strong and embolden your heart, and hope to Hashem," and Rashi explains, if your prayer was not accepted, go back and hope (-pray). And so (one should do) forever, until Hashem looks and sees from the Heavens, as it is written (Psalms 130:7), "(Put) hope Israel to Hashem from now until forever."

And all this is already laid out clearly in our words numerous times, however it is necessary to go over and repeat this, and to remember this every single day. For there are many, many types of demoralization and confusion on this, without limit, what the mouth cannot verbalize nor the heart fathom. Therefore it is necessary to go over this a thousand times in order that one should strengthen and embolden himself to stand his ground, to pray and to entreat before Hashem Yisburach constantly, that He should draw him close to His service, come what may. "Let us lift [even] our hearts with our outstretched hands to G-d in Heaven (Lamentations 3:41, according to one interpretation of Rashi),""For Hashem will not abandon His nation, and His inheritance He will not forsake (Psalms 94:14),""The benignities of Hashem, for they have not depleted, for His mercy has not come to an end (Lamentations 3:22)."

(Likutay Moharan vol. 2., Torah 101).

9

A Jew who turns to G-d, G-d puts all edicts aside giving him undivided attention

Outpouring of the Soul, article 25

When a Jew desires to speak with Hashem Yisburach, to express his words before Him blessed He, and to ask from Him that He should draw him close to His service blessed He, then Hashem Yisburach so to speak throws aside all His affairs, and all the edicts that He wishes to decree Heaven forbid, and all His engagements that He blessed He is involved in, so to speak, and He casts everything aside and turns Himself to attend just to this person who desires to speak with Him, and express his words before Him to request from Him that He help him to draw close to Him blessed He. The upshot is, that through this the natural result is that the Jews are saved from all harsh decrees, may the Merciful One save us.

(Words of Rabbi Nachman, article 70).

10

Scream to G-d as if your life is in peril

Outpouring of the Soul, article 29

He said: It is necessary for every person to scream to Hashem Yisburach, and to lift his heart to Him blessed He, as if he were hanging on a thread in middle of the ocean, and powerful storm winds (are) blowing to the heart of the sky, to the extent that he doesn't know what to do, and there is barely even an opportunity to scream. But in truth, certainly he has no aitza (advice, solution, course of action) or recourse except to lift his eyes and heart to Hashem Yisburach. For a person is in grave and dire danger in this world, as every person knows for himself (-in his soul). (Words of Rabbi Nachman, article 29).

11

Scream to G-d from the depth of Hell

Outpouring of the Soul, article 30

One time I (Rabbi Nussun) stood before him, and he o.b.m. was resting on his bed, and the following words were discharged from his holy mouth, and he said these words: “Der (the) ikar (main thing) iz (is), 'meebeten (from the belly of) scheol (-hell) sheevaatee (I screamed) (Jonah 2:3)'.” And see in the book Ullim LiTrufa (Leaves for Healing, letter 60), which brings down there this statement, and writes there the following: And every person is so despondent to the extent that it appears to him as if this was not said regarding him, as if he descended lower than the belly of scheol (-hell) Heaven forbid, and as if he is no longer able to scream, and as if he has already screamed a very great deal and it was to no avail, and many more such excuses and denial. And the truth is not so, for I know the truth, that he o.b.m. intended in all his words also etc. and pertaining every single person etc., see there.

(Words of Rabbi Nachman, article 302).

12

Pray for everything, even the smallest concern

Outpouring of the Soul, article 36

He said, for every matter it is necessary to pray, that is, if one's garment is torn and he needs clothing, he should pray to Hashem Yisburach that He should give him clothing to wear. And so forth with everything similar. Something big or small, for everything, one should accustom himself to pray always to Hashem Yisburach for everything he is lacking. Even though the main thing is to pray for the fundamental, namely, for the service of Hashem Yisburach, to draw close to Him blessed He, even still, also for this one needs to pray. And he said: He who does not practice this, even though Hashem Yisburach gives him clothing, and a livelihood, and all his needs in life, nevertheless his whole life is like an animal, which Hashem Yisburach also gives it food etc.. Because since he does not draw all his sustenance through prayer from Hashem Yisburach, consequently all his vitality is mamash (-really) like the life of an animal, because a person needs to draw all his sustenance and his needs from Hashem Yisburach specifically through prayer and entreaty. And one time he (Rabbi Nachman) said to his student, our teacher the rav, Rabbi Nussun zatza”l, regarding a small and very trivial matter that he somewhat required, “Did you prayer for this to Hashem Yisburach?” And he stood flabbergasted, for this matter was wondrous in his eyes, to pray to Hashem Yisburach for something infinitesimal such as this, and also because it was not overly necessary. He (Rabbi Nachman) spoke up and said to him (with an inquisitive inflection), “This is beneath your dignity, that you should pray to Hashem Yisburach for such a trite matter?” And the general principle is, that for everything in the world one needs to pray to Hashem Yisburach.

(Words of Rabbi Nachman, article 233).

13

Hisbodidus can take time to show its effect like dripping on a stone until it carves a niche

Outpouring of the Soul, article 37

He said regarding encouragement in hisbodidus and conversing between oneself and his Creator: Even if many days and years pass by, and it seems to him that he still has not accomplished anything with his conversing and his words, even still he should not fall from this whatsoever, for the truth is that certainly the words are making an impression. An allegory for this: Like water coming down on a stone, even though it would seem that the water doesn't have power against the hard stone, and the water has no apparent impression in the stone, even still, when the water comes down on the stone many, many times consecutively, they bore a whole in the stone, as can be seen outright. Similarly, even if one's heart is a heart of stone, and shows no sign of his words and his prayers, even still with the accumulation of days and years his heart of stone will be pierced through his conversing and his words, like (Job 14:19), “stones withered by water,” as mentioned above. (Words of Rabbi Nachman, article 234).

14

Encouragement to pray strongly even when one seemingly has reason to be disheartened

Outpouring of the Soul, article 42

He said: Even if a person is the way he is, even still he should strengthen and embolden his heart to pray to Hashem Yisburach. And he said, that one should think in his heart, “Behold, if in my eyes I am so distant from Hashem Yisburach due to my plethora of sins, in that case, on the contrary, the main completion of the prayer – is specifically through me, for behold our rabbis o.b.m. said (Kreesus 6:), every prayer that doesn't include in it, (something) from the prayers of the iniquitous of Israel, is not (considered) prayer, and we learn this from the Incense (Kitoaress), which contained chelbinnu (galbanum). So if this is the case, if I am like the iniquitous of Israel Heaven forbid, if so, on the contrary, the entire completion of the prayer is specifically through me, as mentioned above, so certainly I need to strengthen (myself) all the more so, to pray to Hashem Yisburach, and be confident in Hashem's kindness, that He will listen and receive my prayer as well, for on the contrary, specifically through me there is the main completion of the prayer, for it is impossible to burn the Kitoaress without chelbinnu, hence chelbinnu is also the completion of the Kitoaress. And so too regarding prayer, as mentioned above, without my measly prayer which joins the prayer of Israel, the prayer would not have completion.” (Words of Rabbi Nachman, article 295).

And see additional strong encouragement regarding prayer in Words of Rabbi Nachman (article 283) what he said regarding the youth, who are usually perturbed in their prayers due to their not having merited to sanctify themselves properly in the holiness of conjugation, and therefore when they stand afterwards to pray, it is very difficult for them to pray. And he o.b.m. warned of this many times, not to fall in resolve from this whatsoever, and what was, was, and during the prayer it is necessary to forget everything completely, and rally to always pray with joy as is befitting, whatever state he is in, and to trust in Hashem Yisburach that in the very end he will merit through the prayer to win the battle, and to sanctify himself as is befitting. And he said, that regarding this Abba Binyumin took pains (Brachos 5b) that his prayer should be close to his bed; “bed“ is a term for conjugation, and this is the meaning of “on my prayer, that it should be close to my bed,” namely, that I should be able to pray afterwards, immediately following, and this matter should not disconcert my prayer whatsoever.

15

Request mercy to be strengthened from above to request mercy

Outpouring of the Soul, article 74

When one comes to express his words before Hashem Yisburach, and cannot open his mouth whatsoever, even still he needs to bolster (himself) to request mercy, that they should help him from above, and they should buttress his strength so that he will be able to ask for mercy. As Our Sages o.b.m. said (Sanhedrin 54), a person should always request mercy that all (the supernal beings) bolster his strength, and Rashi explains, that the ministering angels (malachay hashurais) help him to request mercy etc., see there.

(Likutay Halachoas, Laws of the Morning Blessings, law 5:97).

16

Holy words eventually reverse sins to be considered unintentional and even good.

Outpouring of the Soul, article 81

Even though a person is the way he is, even still he should be resolute (in his mind) in the place where he is, to speak words of prayer and hisbodidus which (/for they) are the aspect of the perfection of the Holy Tongue, through which the all encompassing evil of the lust for promiscuity is subdued, as mentioned above, article 68. And his intention should be, in order that he merit through this to subdue and break his evil, in order that he return to Hashem Yisburach. Certainly this will be beneficial for him, for certainly not a single utterance will be lost, and over time Hashem Yisburach will have mercy on him, and all the holy words that he released from his mouth will be gathered, and through this he will subdue and nullify the all encompassing evil of the lust for promiscuity, and then inherently he will easily be able to nullify afterwards all the other desires as well. And the essential thing is that he should be very strong in this, days and years, no matter what transpires over him, and through this he will merit to repentance, and the sins will first be reversed into unintentional sins (see inside), and then afterwards the tzaddikim who already merited to the summit of the perfection of the Holy Tongue will raise and clarify his holy words, and through this he will be able, with their power, to be inverted to be completely good.

And this is (Hosea 14:2), “Return Israel (up) to Hashem your G-d for you have stumbled in your sins,” namely, that through repentance the sins will be reversed to (be considered) unintentional, in the aspect of stumbling. But through what means will they merit to this? Addressing this the verse concludes (verse 3), “Take with you (plural) words and return to Hashem,” and through this the sins will be turned around to be unintentional, and afterwards they can be raised with ease to be completely good, with the power of the great tzaddikim, as mentioned above. And this is (continuation of the verse), “Say to Him, bear all the iniquity, and take good,” that He should completely forgive the sins, to the extent that they be inverted to be completely good. (Likutay Halachos, Laws of New-produce, law 4).

17

Prayer begins with praising G-d which establishes faith in oneself, like the realization of having a first-born who gets two portions.

Outpouring of the Soul, article 92

It is necessary (for a person) to strongly reinforce with complete faith, to believe in himself, that he has the capability to accomplish every matter with his prayer and his conversation between himself and his Maker. For there are all types of (hang-ups, inhibitions, and) lack of resolve in a person's heart regarding this, as each one knows in his soul, and most people are under the impression, that they don't have the strength for this, and subsequently they don't strengthen in prayer, and hence it is necessary to toil with very great exertion and devotion in this matter. And the main exertion is at the beginning, in the aspect of (Rashi on Yisro 19:5 from the Mechilta), “all beginnings are difficult,” that is, when one begins to pray and do hisbodidus, for then he still has not seen any effect brought about through his prayer and his hisbodidus. However, when he merits to rise up with all his strength to pray with kavana (-concentration, intention) and to do hisbodidus, until he merits to accomplish something with his prayer, for example, that he prayed for something and was answered, then he is bolstered by this to believe in himself, that he has the power to accomplish with his prayer, since he sees that his prayer also, Hashem Yisburach heard, and he was answered. And then there is established by him a complete vessel to receive the shefa (-bounty) through the words of the prayer, because the essential materialization of the vessel is – through faith, that is, by that which he has faith in himself, that Hashem Yisburach listens to his prayer as well.

And this is the aspect of what the first-born takes pea-shna'yim (double portion). And it is brought down in the writings of the Arizal (Likutay Torah, Va'yaira, page 28a, paragraph beginning with the word “vinachzor”- and let us return), that in all the (subsequent) offspring there is a component of the birth of the first-born in them, that is, because all the offspring and all the bounty are drawn through prayer, and the birth of the first-born is drawn from the aspect of the first accomplishment, that the Israelite accomplishes through his prayer, through which his faith is fortified to always pray, and a vessel is made by him etc. as mentioned above, and therefore the first-born takes (Deuteronomy 21:17), “pea-shna'yim (double portion) of everything that is to be found of him (the deceased father),” because in everything that is found, and was begotten, and provisioned to him by means of prayer, there is in it a component of the first action that he accomplished with his prayer, which is the aspect of the birth of the first-born, and therefore he has a portion in lieu of each and everyone; and therefore Rabbainu o.b.m. explained that the (role of the) first-born is prayer. And the concept of pea-shna'yim (double portion) that the first-born takes, is the concept of the two aspects that prayer has; praise of Hashem ('mukoam' - “the Place”, as explained above), and the request of one's needs, as mentioned above. For the order of setting out the praise of Hashem first, and the request of one's needs afterwards, is also this concept, because through the recollection of His praises blessed He, that He is the “G-d of our fathers” etc., “Who bestows beneficial kindnesses,” that He did with them kindness, and listened to their prayers always, which through this His name was Unified in the world, through this our belief in ourselves is strengthened by us, that He will have mercy on us as well, and He will hear our prayers when we request our needs.

And this is what is written (Psalms 44:2), “the action which You did in their days, in the days of yore etc. (verse 5) command (for) the salvations of Jacob etc.,” that is, just like You did in the days of our forefathers, and You made great miracles and salvations for them, so too “command (for) the salvations of Jacob”- now as well. However, sometimes the baal duvur (-litigator – Satan) can weaken a person's resolve, that even though our fathers and rabbis accomplished so much with their prayers, (but) an inferior person such as yourself, how is it possible that you will achieve results with your prayer? However the reality is not so, for Hashem Yisburach hears the prayer of every mouth, and every one of Israel has the power to achieve his request mercifully by Him blessed He, if he truly prays to Him. And therefore a person needs to take to heart and remind himself of the many times he called out from the midst of hardship to Hashem, and He answered him and saved him, and through this he will strengthen now as well in prayer, and Hashem will save him, as mentioned above.

(Likutay Halachos, Laws of Inheritance, law 4).

Likutay Tefilos

Prayer 21

“My calling is to Hashem and I scream, my calling is to Hashem and I supplicate (/seek His grace) (Psalms 142:2).” “My call is to Eloah”im and He listens to me (Psalms 77:2).” “From the belly of Sheol (-hell) I cried out, You heard my call (Jonah 2:3).” “And my cry came to You, to Your holy chamber.” “My call You heard, do not hide Your ear from (listening to the prayers for) my relief, from my cry (Lamentation 3:56).” “Hear Hashem my call that I call out, and be gracious with me and answer me (Psalms 27:7).” “Our cries receive, and listen to our screaming, He who know the mysterious/hidden (Prayer of Unuh Bikoach),” Master of the World, He who listens with mercy to the call of the cry of His nation Israel. Have mercy and be gracious with us, and have compassion on us, and be to our succor, and prepare/set our hearts that we should scream and holler to You in truth until You answer us, “we will cry out and You shall say, ‘Here I am’(Isaiah 58:9 – and He shall say…).” And the call of our screaming should ‘go and gain great strength (Exodus 19:19)’, and we shall not give You respite, until You are gracious with us, and listen to our call, and heed our cry, and have mercy on us in Your mercies, and we should merit to reveal, and to illuminate, and to beget holy minds/consciousnesses which are presently hidden from us due to our sins in great hiddenness and great concealment, to the extent that, due to our sins, we don’t have daas (-holy realization of knowledge) now to know/recognize You and to serve You in truth, and we do not merit to come up with real true novelties (-chidushim) in Your holy Torah.

Master of the World, before You is revealed all the mysterious/hidden things, and You know our hearts, that we are so alienated from You now, so very much so that mortification covers our faces, and we are ashamed to ask and request from You this, that You reveal to us the mysteries and the secrets of the Torah, because we don’t know what to ask for first, because we still did not begin to purify and sanctify ourselves whatsoever. However, You know the great preciousness of the holiness of our souls in our roots, because You chose us from all the nations, and called us a holy nation, a nation of segoolah (-priceless treasure, even above metaphysics and rational), as it is written (Exodus 19:5), “and You (plural) will be from me a segoolah from all the nations,” and as it is written (Psalms 135:4), “Because Jacob, Y”uh (-G-d) chose him, Israel as his segooluh.” Have mercy and compassion on Your segooluh and Your beloved, on Your nation and Your inheritance, on Your coveted desirable of all the hosts (of nations), whom You called (us) with all expressions of endearment in Your love and in Your compassion, You loved us, and You desired us, and You exalted us from all the nations, and You our king drew us close to Your service. May Your innards moan over us, Your mercies kindle/whelm over our lowliness and our degradation, arise in our help and save us, and put in our hearts to scream to You always, until You have mercy on us and return Your countenance to us, and draw us close. Even though I know, that according to my great alienation from You, with thousands and myriads of alienations, there is no power in my scream to arouse and to beget the hidden moachin (-minds, consciousnesses), and even if I had the power to scream and holler all the callings of all the creations of the world, they would not suffice for me, even for what I need to scream over one of my alienations of one day. And there isn’t any call in the world that has the power to help me according to my great alienation from you, “even though I scream and cry out, He shuts [the windows of heaven before] my prayer (Lamentations 3:8).” All the more so, and all the more so, that I have not even begun to scream as I am capable. However, You have already made known to us, that You are full of mercy for us at all times and at every instant, and in Your abundant mercies You listen and hear all the callings of the world, from the depths of the depths, as it is written (Jonah 2:3), “from the belly of scheol (-hell) I cried out, You heard my call.” Therefore “I base my reliance/precepts” on Your great goodnesses and graciousnesses, because upon You abundant mercies I am confidant, and upon Your kindness I rely, and for Your forgiveness I hope, and for Your salvation I await. And I have come to spread out my palms before You Hashem our G-d and the G-d of our fathers, help me, and be gracious to me, and arouse my heart in truth, that I should merit to truly feel my enormous pain, the pain of my soul (-nefesh, lowest part of the soul, seated in the blood), and my ruach (-spirit - mid level), and my neshama (-soul seated in the intellect), and I should merit to see, and to understand the utter magnitude of my alienation from You, and (You should) merit me to scream to You always with all my strength, and You should be full of mercy on me, and hear my defected call, and listen to my warped cry. And (You should) have mercy on me in Your mercies, and help me to fix my call, and raise me from (having a) defected call to a good call. And (You should) merit me to scream both in Torah and in Prayer, until I merit in Your abundant mercies, to arouse and sire with my call the hidden moachin (-minds, consciousnesses) that disappeared from us due to our sins. And due to our abundant sins we have, so to speak, weakened the supernal strength, to the extent that it is as if the power of the Shechina (-Divine Presence) has been too weakened to beget the moachin, as it is written, “<Tzoor> the Rock/Creator <yiludchuh teshee> has been made too weak to beget (moachin) for you (Deuteronomy 32:18).” “Because the sons (are likened to women whom) have come to the birth-stool but do not have the strength to give birth (Kings II:19:3, Isaiah 37:3).”

Master of the Universe, do for Your sake and not for our sake, do for the sake of Your Shechina (-Divine Presence), and help us to scream to You in truth, in Torah, and in prayer, and our call “should rise, and come, and arrive” to You, and receive the call of our screams in place of the screams of the Shechina, until we merit to arouse and beget our hidden holy moachin (-minds, consciousnesses) which have disappeared from us. Because You alone know the hidden, and before You are revealed the hidden moachin of each and every one of us, where they have disappeared and hidden from us. Help us, and save us and all of Your nation the House of Israel, that each and every on of us merit to arouse, through the call of our screams, the holy moachin which have disappeared from each and every one to the place where they disappeared, until each and every one will merit every time to sire, and to reveal, and to attain new moachin which belong/conform to him, according to the root of his nefesh (-lower soul), his ruach (-spirit, mid soul), and his neshama (-third soul seated in the intellect). And we should merit to truly know/recognize/be familiar with You, and to know You every time with (overly) more understanding, and we should merit to reveal Your divinity in the world.

And in this vein, may it be the will before You <Yihee rutzoan meelifunechuh> Hashem our G-d and the G-d of our fathers, full of mercy, that You have mercy on us, and (that You) help us, and save us quickly that we should begin from now to sanctify the seven (candle like) flames which illuminate opposite the countenance of the holy menorah, (the seven-) which are the (two) eyes, and the (two) ears, and the mouth, and the nose (-two nostrils). And (You should) merit me to sanctify my mouth so that no word of falsehood leaves my mouth ever, and neither any word which defects the mouth Heaven forbid, just, all my words should be words of truth always in holiness and in purity, and I should merit to sanctify my mouth with Torah, and prayer, and with all types of words which sanctify the mouth. And (You should) merit me to sanctify my eyes, and merit me to shut my eyes from seeing evil, and be to my succor so that I don’t have any glimpse of anything of this world whatsoever, and especially help me, and save me, and rescue me, so that I do not look Heaven forbid at anything which brings to (improper) thoughts Heaven forbid, have mercy and be gracious with me, and have compassion on me, and save me, rescue my soul from now (on) from defection of sight, and I shall not prospect after (the desires of) my heart and after (the desires of) my eyes, “withdraw/shift my eyes from beholding vanity, in Your ways gives me life (Psalms 119:37).” And merit me to sanctify my ears, and I should merit to always hear the words of true sages and to believe in them, and I should have consummate emoonas chachumim (-faith in the sages), and (You should) be to my succor that I incline my ears always to hear the words of the true sages and that their words should enter in my ears and truly arouse my heart to return to You and to do Your will always. And (You should) guard me, and save me so that I never hear and that they never enter into my ears any defected speech, and I should not hear and I shall not accept any word of lushoan hura (-evil tongue) or richeeloos (– tale-bearing), and I should not hear words of profanity ever, and neither any defected speech, just, I should merit to hear always holy words from the mouths of true tzadikim and kosher people, words that sanctify the ears of the listener. And merit me that I should have true fear of Heaven, and through this I will merit to sanctify my nose, and there will be fulfilled in me the verse which states (Isaiah 11:3), “and he will have the sense of smell by (virtue of his) fear of Hashem.”

And all that I have defected until now in these seven (candle-like) flames through my abundant sins and defects, that I transgressed, erred, and sinned before You, and I defected (with) my mouth, and my eyes, and my ears, and my nose from my youth until today, unintentionally (bishoagaig) and intentionally (bimaizeed)  coerced/ensnared (bi-oaness) and willfully (birutzoan), on all of them (You should) pardon and forgive me Merciful [One Who is] “gracious and prolific to forgive,” and rectify in Your mercies all these defects, because we abounded to sin and defect with them, because who can fathom, or calculate, or count the sins and the defects with the words of our mouths, from the day we were on the earth until today, and how much falsehood went out from my mouth almost every single day, and similarly the other sins and great defects which I defected with the words of my mouth, with words of lushoan hura (-evil tongue), and richeeloos (-tale-bearing), and laytzanoos (-mockery), and idle chatter without measure, and calculation, and counting, and especially the numerous and enormous, vast and great defects that I defected with my eyes, who can fathom them or count/relate them, who can enumerate them verbally, and I am unable even to make confession on them, all the more so (I am unable to) to make copious rectifications according to these abundant defects to rectify them, because there has yet to transpire over me one day of my life which I didn’t defect on it with my eyes, unintentionally (bishoagaig) and intentionally (bimaizeed)  coerced/ensnared (bi-oaness) and willfully (birutzoan), and You alone know to where the defect of the eyes reaches, for all the whole entire Torah is contingent upon them, oy (-woe) to me, veye (-woe) to me, what can I say what can I speak? If I (set out to) relate like an infinitesimal fringe of the defect of the eye which I defected on every single day, the time would run out and they would not be exhausted, “if I were to count them they would be more numerous than the sand (Psalms 139:18).” So if You Yourself (-in person) do not act for Your sake Heaven forbid, and rectify all these enormous defects in Your mercies, it is not in our hands to rectify even one defect of them, all the more so all of them. “If Y”uh (-Gd) retains sins, Adoan”ai (-Gd) who can stand (-endure)? For with You is forgiveness, so that You You be feared (Psalms 130:3-4).” Have mercy and compassion on us, have mercy and compassion on us, because we don’t have the intellect and daas (-holy realization of knowledge) how to lenify and appease You over all these huge and terrible defects that we defected until now in/with these seven holy (candle-like) flames which are drawn form the holy mind. And from the utter enormous multitude of these defects that we defected in/with these seven flames, through this our daas (-holy realization of knowledge) has been defected, and our intellect has rotted, and our minds and our daas have been confused, and because of this I am visited with questionings, and confusions, and perversions of the heart, and my daas and my heart are being severely confused and perverted, to the extent that I cannot draw close to any matter of holiness properly, and there is a desire to alienate us completely Heaven forbid from Your service in truth.

Master of the Universe, You know the bitterness of my heart, You know the bitter perversions of my heart. You know who they are exactly (-“who and who”) who rise against us all the times and at every instant, “Hashem how plentiful are my adversaries, many rise up against me (Psalms 3:2).” And (as if) it’s not enough with our souls’ abundant hardships tat we have through all bad desires, that we transgressed, and erred, and sinned very copiously before You, through that which we went after the bad dictates/wanton of our hearts, and we defected in Your great Name, and many worlds were destroyed through our abundant sins, as You alone know how many defects we caused through our abundant sins. And as if all of this was not enough for us, in addition they have risen thickly braided upon our throats, and extremely confuse our daas (-holy realization of knowledge), and pervert our hearts profusely with many foolish questions on Hashem Yisburach and on true tzadikim, and desire to distance us from the (central) point of the truth Heaven forbid. Master of the World, have mercy and compassion on us, and do not judge us according to our deeds, and do not deal with us in congruence with our transgressions. And have mercy on us and berate those who pursue (to attack) us, and distance and banish from us and from all Your nation the House of Israel all types of bad thoughts, and contemplations/fantasies, and perversions of the heart, and twisted questioning and foolish (philosophical) enquiries that desire to rise on the heart to confuse (people) Heaven forbid (away) from Your true service. And fix with Your mercies so that there should not rise anymore in our hearts any nuance of (improper) musing and thought whatsoever of this kind, of the type of these quandaries and confusions, “Because I am brutish less than a man, and I do not have man’s understanding (Proverbs 30:2).” “And I am brutish and without cognizance, I was like an animal with You (Psalms 73:22).”

Master of the Universe, have mercy and compassion on us, and merit us to true perfect faith, that we should merit to believe in You and in Your true tzadikim truthfully and wholeheartedly. And we should not incline our hearts to any dilemma or any quandary in the world whatsoever, and they should not rise and they should not enter in our hearts and minds whatsoever, just, we should cast away our warped and confused intellect, and rely just on faith alone. Because we are flesh and blood, a lump of earth, hewed from clay, heated with sin, filthy with transgression, and how is it possible for one born from a woman, a putrid drop, to attain conception and to understand a matter of Your ways and practices/managements? And we should merit not to use our intellect, except for Your service, and for Your Torah, and for awe of You in truth, and we should not begin to ponder in our minds any quandary of this world whatsoever, and we shall know and believe truly and with consummate faith that You are righteous and upright/straight (yushur), as it is written (Deuteronomy 32:4), “The Rock/Creator his performance is wholesome (tumim), for all His ways are (with) justice, a faithful Gd and without iniquity, righteous (tzadik) and upright/straight (yushur) is He.” And it says (Psalms 92:16), “To declare that Hashem is upright, my Rock/Creator, and there is no injustice by Him.” And guard us with Your abundant mercies, and save us and our children, and all of Your nation the House of Israel, that we should not learn, and not glance at all in the books of the naturalists (/scientists/philosophers), neither in the books of research of the pagans, nor in the books of research of Israel (-the Jews), and we should/shall not be favorably inclined and not heed them whatsoever, and we should/shall not go in their ways, and not step in their paths, and not give attention to their words, and their derailed words and queries, and their questions and (their) quandaries should/shall not enter into our ears and into our minds whatsoever. Because You know the many great evils, and the many destructions which the naturalists caused us through their queries and their fallaciousness, because they desire to distance us Heaven forbid from Your true service. Have mercy and compassion on Your great and holy glory, and do for the sake of Israel Your nation, and for the sake of their forefathers, Avruhum, Yitzchuk, and Yaakoav, and for the sake of Moshe and Aharoan, Dovid and Shloamoa, and for the sake of the twelve tribes of Y”uh, and for the sake of the holy elders, and the true prophets, the first ones and the later ones, and for the sake of all the Tana-im (-sages of the Mishna) and Amoaru-im (-sages of the Talmud), and for the sake of all the tzadikim, and truly kosher people that were in every single generation. And have mercy on the remnants of Your nation Israel in this time of trouble, the likes of which never were, that they desire Heaven forbid, now, at the heel (-imminent arrival) of the Messiah, for the outspread Heaven forbid of philosophy in the world, and they desire to ensnare the souls of Israel in their ways and reasonings, and no one takes to heart to feel the this great plight in their heart, the likes of which never were in history, this being the main birth-pangs of Messiah, and regarding this great calamity all our prophets and true sages prophesized in advance, as it is written (Daniel 12:1), “And it will be a time of trouble [for Yaakov (-this Hebrew word is not found in this verse, but in a similar verse in Jeremiah 30:7)] which [the likes of (-this Hebrew word in not found in this verse, but is used in the verse in Jeremiah 30:7)] never was.” And like Daniel prophesized with his ruach hakoadesh (-Divine spirit), as it is written (Daniel 12:10), “(The) Many will be culled and cleaned and refined, but the wicked will be wicked, and all the wicked will not understand, but the maskeeleem (-intelligentsia) will understand.” Master of the entire world, You alone know the great magnitude of this plight of which there is nothing similar, “fatiguing distress and ostracizing darkness (Isaiah 8:22),” and there is no one to stand up for us, because the true tzadikim passed away due to our sins. Have mercy and compassion on us, may Your mercies be aroused on Your sons, and protects us, and guard us, and save us, and rescue our souls, and save us in Your mercies, us and all of our society, and all of Your nation the House of Israel, from all the evil and alien opinions and reasonings of all the naturalists and the philosophers, from both, the pagan naturalists, and (from) the naturalists of Israel (-Jews) who were also caught in this evil net and trap of queries (of naturalism) and philosophy. And don Your vengeance and gird Your might, and uproot, and break, and quash, and nullify their evil thoughts from the world, and all the heretics, and all who are intent on/committed to sinning, and all the apostates, and all the apeekorsim should perish in an instant, and there should not be left a remembrance or recollection of any reasoning of their reasonings, nor any opinion of their opinions. Have mercy and compassion on us, have mercy and be gracious with us, and save and rescue us and our children and all of Your nation the House of Israel, from all their books, and from all their opinions, and from all their reasonings, because not in these is the portion of Jacob (cf. Jeremiah 10:16), not in these is our portion, not in these is our lot, because we are the children of Avruhum, Yitzchuk, and Yisroel Your servants, believers sons of believers (maameenim binay maameenim), and we believe in You Hashem our G-d, and in Your true tzadikim, with true complete faith, without any queries whatsoever, because You are righteous and upright, and You rule the entire world with the attribute of kindness and mercy, as it is written (Psalms 145:9), “Hashem is good to all, and His mercies are on all His works.”

Please Adon”ai (-Hashem), may Your innards moan over us, “hear my call when I call (out to) You (Psalms 141:1),” and be to our succor, that we should merit to beget always the hidden moachin (-minds, consciousnesses) through the call of our screaming. And have mercy on us, and save us, and merit us to truly sanctify and purify the seven (candle-like) flames which go out from the mind in our heads, which are: the mouth, and two eyes, and two ears, and two nostrils. And through this we should merit to draw to ourselves the light of the countenance which is shefa Eloahee (-Divine Bestowal/flux), which is the attainment of the holy makeefeem (-peripheral surrounding spiritual presence) of the intellect, and bestow on us Your ruach hakoadesh (-the holy spirit i.e. the Divine spirit), and we should merit in Your mercies to understand and to attain every time new makeefeem of holiness, and we should merit to understand, and to have astute insight in the depth of Your secrets. And (You should) help us that we merit each time to (overly) more holiness, in order that we merit each time to attain new makeefeem, to insert them inside into our intellect, to understand and to attain conception each time of new understanding and conceptions of holiness, what we previously did not know to understand and conceive. And we should merit to know (-be familiar, acquaintance) You also in this world, and to attain conception of Your greatness and loftiness, everything that is possible to attain conception of in this world, because for this we were created, to know and to attain conception of You. And You by-and-by are going to take an accounting and reckoning from us over this, on whoever did not strive to truly sanctify himself in this world until he attained conception of Your divinity, and knowledge of Your loftiness blessed and exalted is Your name forever. Have mercy and compassion on us, and help us in Your mercies to attain higher conceptions each time in holiness and in purity, in truth and with perfect faith. The truth I know, Master of the Entire World, that I am now so far from this to the extent that I cannot even request, and supplicate, and implore You for this now, but what can I do for (-as) my Father in Heaven has decreed (me to). Because You Yourself decreed upon us in Your Torah through Your true tzadikim, that we endeavor and try with all our might always to know (-be familiar, acquaintance), and to attain conception, and to know You in truth and wholeheartedly. Have mercy and be gracious with me with gratuitous gifting, that we merit to truly sanctify ourselves with exceeding holiness, and bestow in our hearts strengthening and emboldment, that we should be strong in our convictions to supplicate and implore You over this. Because You are our Father, and You desire to do good/favors with us, with Your true goodness, with all types of true good things, and You anticipate always to reveal to us, and to make known to us Your hidden cache of goodness and Your high conceptions (hasagoas), and there is no restriction just from our side. Rise to our help, and save us to scream to You always in truth and with a whole heart, and to purify and sanctify ourselves with all types of purity and holinesses, and to abound in prayer, and entreaty, and words of conciliation and appeasement before You always, until we merit each time to attain conception and to insert new makeefeem (-peripheral surrounding spiritual presence) of holiness into our minds and intellects. And merit us to the future world (Oalum Habuh), to the world which is entirely good, and there You will merit us in Your mercies to be included in You, and to attain all the holy makeefeem of the intellect which were not possible in any way to attain in this world. And we will merit in Your mercies to eternal life, to good and long life from now until forever, forever and ever, and for all eternity. And (You should) merit us to have complete holy daas (-realization of knowledge), and we should merit to know that all is for our benefit, and all the good bounties will be drawn to us without lacking anything.

And (You should) have mercy on us in Your abundant mercies, and merit us and all of Your nation the House of Israel, that there should remain from us a remnant on Earth, in this world, after our passing from the world after (a life of) lengthy days and years, that we should merit that our children, and children’s children endure forever, and for generations until the end of all the generations. And our names and memory should endure forever through our progeny that will remain after us. And (You should) merit us with many sons and with daughters, in holiness and in purity, and we should merit to see sons to our sons, and there should not be among us or our progeny sterile (men) or barren (women). And have mercy on them, and bestow upon them life, and longevity of days and years, so that all our descendants (“of our loins) will have longevity of days and years, and they will all be engaged in Your Torah lishmuh (-for its own sake, for the sake of the Shechina) and fulfill Your mitzvoas (-commandments), and they will all be holy and pure from all sin and transgression, and they will do Your will, and engage in Your service in truth all their days, forever, in such a way that our sons after us will draw the intellect of the countenance into the world after our passing, and they will reveal and publicize Your Divinity and Sovereignty in the world, and our memory will be left for all the generations forever.

Merciful [One], “Who devises schemes so that there shall not be rejected from You (-in the verse: Him) a reject (cf. Samuel 2:14:14),” may Your mercies well up over us, and rise up and bring us salvation, and save us, and our children, and all the children of Your nation the House of Israel, so that Your entire nation of Israel should not need to come to the necessity of chaleetzuh nor to the necessity of yeeboom. And there should be a fulfillment with us of the verse which writes (Psalms 128:6), “And see sons to your sons, peace upon Israel.” Because You alone know the utter magnitude of pity there is on the soul of the deceased without living progeny Heaven forbid, that the soul goes naked and does not have the ability to rise to its original place, and it cannot return to the house of her (-soul is feminine) father, and she (-the soul being feminine) goes vagabond and beleaguered/crazed, and she has no rest for the sole of her foot. Master of the World, have mercy on us in Your abundant mercies and Your enormous kindnesses, and save us, and our children, and all Your nation the House of Israel, so that not one of them goes from the world without living progeny, just, all of them should leave after themselves sons and daughters live and well (-enduring), engaged in the (study of the) Torah and (doing the) mitzoas), and all of them should make many children (“fruit”), their saplings should go (-grow) forth (cf. Hosea 14:7), their branches should grow long (cf. Ezekiel 31:5), “They will still be fruitful in old age, succulent and fresh they will be (Psalms 92:15).” And the border of holiness will multiply through the children of Israel who will multiply exceedingly in the world. And there will remain from each and every one of Israel, generations, and many generations until the end of all the generations, and remember/grant all the childless with viable children, for Your service and to fear You. And all those souls from Your nation Israel who already went to their worlds (-passed away), and did not leave after themselves living children, have mercy on them in Your abundant mercies, and rectify them in Your enormous kindnesses. And help all Your nation the House of Israel, everywhere they are, that they should merit to fulfill the mitzva of yeeboom and chaleetzuh with the true and proper completeness, with great holiness and purity, and they should merit to perform with integrity the rectification that is necessary for the soul of the deceased, in such a way that his soul will rise to the light of the countenance, and will return to his place and his resting, “to go before G-d in the light of (the) life (Psalms 56:14).” And from now (on) have mercy on us, and on our children, and on all Your nation the House of Israel, so that no one of Israel needs to come to the necessity of chaleetzuh nor to the necessity of yeeboom.

And be full of mercy on all the broken hearted that have the pain of raising children Heaven save us, and help them from now (on) that they merit to raise their sons and daughters for Torah, and for chuppah (-wedding canopy), and for good deeds, for lengthy days and years {and specifically….(so and so)….}. Master of the World, Merciful [One], You know their bitter and agitated hearts, their broken and crushed hearts, which the strength to endure has failed, see their infliction and duress, see their tears and hear their groans, and don’t hide Your ears from their screams, because who can bear the sound of their crying, and screaming, and groaning, from the greatness of the calamities which already transpired over them. Master of the entire world, “Who heals the broken hearted and bandages their wounds/sorrows (Psalms 147:3),” heal their brokenness, and give joy to their souls, and say to their hardships, “enough!” And have mercy on them from now (on) and say to the angel/messenger (of punishment), “let up (with) your hands (cf Samuel 2:24:16 and Chronicles).” And arouse Your enormous mercies on them, and send good life and length of days and years to the sons born to them already, that they should merit to raise them for Torah, and for chuppah (-wedding canopy), and for good deeds, and they should have length of days and years in this world, and they should merit to see from them sons and grandsons, and there should go forth from them many generations, and they should merit to beget many more sons and daughters, live and well, and from all them there should go forth many generations, (and generations of generations) until the end of all the generations, they should multiply, and enlarge, and grow until the coming of the redeemer, until the end of all the generations, and all of them should be true doers of Your will, and there should be fulfilled in them and in their children (Isaiah 60:22), “The smallest will become a thousand, and the least (will become) an enormous nation, I am Hashem, in its (due) time I will bring it quickly.” Master of the World, do for Your (own) sake, do for the sake of the merit of their holy forefathers, and have compassion on them from now (on), that their children should persist to live for length of days and years, bring them to happiness like the days You afflicted them (cf. Psalms 90:15), console them from misery, and set (-mount and prepare) their hearts, and help them from now (on), that they should merit to be happy always with sons, which have already been born to them, and which they are yet to additionally beget in the future, all of them should have length of days and years in Torah and greatness, “until the coming of Sheeloa (-King Messiah, Genesis 49:10).”

For SUCCOS

And merit me in Your great mercies and in Your abundant kindnesses, to fulfill the mitzva of Succah properly, with all its particulars, and details, and intentions, and 613 mitzvoas which are contingent/embedded in it, with happiness and good heart, and with consummate kavana (-intention, concentration) as is proper. And we should merit that there should be drawn upon us through the mitzva of Succah sitting/dwelling, all the seven Clouds of Glory that surrounded Israel in the dessert, “and spread upon us the Succah of Your peace.” And we should merit to attain conception of the holy makeefeem (-peripheral surrounding spiritual presence), attainment of conception of ruach hakoadesh (-the holy spirit i.e. Divine spirit), through the (fulfillment of the) mitzva of Succah properly, with holiness, and with purity, and with happiness, and through this protect over us and for us, and save us from all foes, and ambushers, and from all (the) sorts of enemies that we have physically and spiritually, and remove Satan (/adversary, impediment, temptation) from before us and from behind us, and in the shadow of Your wings hide us.

Master of the World, have mercy and be gracious with us, and listen to the call of our prayer with mercy, and bestow upon us shefa Eloahee (-Divine bestowal/flux), the shefa (-bestowal/flux) of the true intellect, the shefa of the holy makeefeem (-peripheral surrounding spiritual presence), the shefa of ruach hakoadesh (-the holy spirit i.e. Divine Spirit). And there should be opened for us the light of the intellect, and the motions of our intellect should speed to attain with great speed the attainment of conception of the holy makeefeem, and we should merit to attain the intellect which is called keddem (-before) which is the light of the countenance, so that we will not need to use any introduction. And through this speed of the motion of the intellect, we shall merit that the flame of our hearts will always rise of itself. And (You should) help us always that our hearts should be fiery with great flaming (-passion) in truth, for Your service, and to fear You, with flaming coals (/darting tongues of fire) of Y”uh (-Gd), and through this holy fieriness of the heart, we should merit to rectify all the defects which we defected through the passion of the heart of the sitra achra (-other realm, i.e. realm of evil). And we should merit to rectify quickly all the defect of the heat and the passion that we had for physical things, for bad desires and bad character traits, which brought us to the hands of great transgressions and sins, through the passion of the heart for desires of this world. Therefore I have come to seek the good will of (/greet with homage) Your countenance, our Lord our G-d, may Your mercies be kindled/whelm over us, and endeavor in saving us, and put strong effort in rectifying our souls, and save us from now (on) that we should not have any more passion in our hearts for any desire in the world, even for permissible things, all the more so, and all the more so that there should not arise in our hearts any excitement Heaven forbid for anything that is prohibited from us. And (You should) help us, and be gracious with us, and bestow upon us in Your compassion, that we should merit to have holy fervor of the heart, to be fired up with flames of love for Your Name and for Your true service, to pray and to entreat, to learn and to teach, and to fulfill all Your commandments with great passion, with holiness and with purity, as is Your true good will. And through this we will merit to rectify the defect of the passion of the sitra achra (-evil realm) that was in our hearts from our youth till today, in such a way that we will merit to truly purify our hearts. And through this we will to express our words (-what is on our minds) before You always, and we will merit to conciliate and appease You, and to entreat before You each time with true new words, which will be pleasant satisfaction (nachas) and desirable before Your Throne of Glory. And we will merit to draw close to You with great closeness, in truth and with a whole heart, as is befitting of Your precious (-segooluh) nation. “A pure heart create for me Gd, and a correct spirit renew inside of me. Do not cast me away from Your countenance, and Your holy spirit do not take from me (Psalms 51:12-13).” And help me that I should merit to come up with new insights (cheedooshim) in the Torah, true novelties, with holiness and with purity, and I should merit to always draw novelties of the Torah, that I should have permission from the Heavens to reveal them to Your nation the House of Israel, to the precious (-segooluh) nation, and the merit should be brought about through me, and I should merit to do goodness, from the goodness that You graciously grant me, to all Your nation the House of Israel, to reveal the treasure (-segooluh) to the treasured (-segooluh) nation, to reveal to them what You merit me to attain conception in my intellect, true novelties of the (-cheedooshay) Torah, with holiness and with purity, in such a way that they will return in complete repentance through my words, and I should not foul with the words of my mouth, and I should not say anything that isn’t according to Your will. He Who erects the poor from the earth, from the dunghills He elevates the destitute (cf. Psalms 113:7), have mercy and be gracious with me, and fulfill my wishes/requests with mercy, and do for Your sake and not for our sakes, do for Your sake and save us, “and from before You our King do not answer us (leaving us) empty-handed, be gracious with us, and answer us, and listen to the call of our prayer, because You listen to prayer (Shemoaneh Esray),” and hear our call from the depth, which the House of Israel screams to You from a distant land (cf. Jeremiah 8:19), “the sighing and the groaning (Ezekiel 9:4).” “You cannot hide (-make as You don’t see, Rashi on Deuteronomy 22:3,” “from Your brother the destitute (Deuteronomy 15:7),” “You must certainly help (Exodus 23:5),” and, “You must certainly raise up (Deuteronomy 22:4).” “[He Who] Rides the heavens is to our succor, and in His haughtiness [He rides the fifth heaven which is called] Shechukim (cf. Deuteronomy 33:26).”

(Here one should say Psalm 29:


============================================================
CHAPTER 2: Section 1: Mizmor liDovid <A Psalm of David>, huvoo <give> lAdoan”oy <to Hashem> binay <children/members of> ai
============================================================

1. Mizmor liDovid <A Psalm of David>, huvoo <give> lAdoan”oy <to Hashem> binay <children/members of> aileem <the mighty/angels>, huvoo lAdoan”oy <give to Hashem> kuvoad <honor> vi-oaz <and might>.


============================================================
CHAPTER 3: Section 2: Huvoo <give> lAdoan”oy <to Hashem> kivoad shimoa <the honor befitting His Name> heeshtachavoo <prost
============================================================

2. Huvoo <give> lAdoan”oy <to Hashem> kivoad shimoa <the honor befitting His Name> heeshtachavoo <prostrate yourselves> lAdoan”oy <to Hashem> bihadras koadesh <in/with the splendor of holiness>.


============================================================
CHAPTER 4: Section 3: Koal <the call of> Adoan”oy <Hashem> al <is on> hamoyim <the waters>, Ai”l hakuvoad <the glorious Al
============================================================

3. Koal <the call of> Adoan”oy <Hashem> al <is on> hamoyim <the waters>, Ai”l hakuvoad <the glorious Almighty> heereym <thunders>, Adoan”oy <Hashem> al <is on> ma-yeem rabbeem <many waters>.


============================================================
CHAPTER 5: Section 4: Koal <the call of> Adoan”oy <Hashem> bakoa-ach <is powerful>, koal Adoan”oy <the call of Hashem> be’
============================================================

4. Koal <the call of> Adoan”oy <Hashem> bakoa-ach <is powerful>, koal Adoan”oy <the call of Hashem> be’hudur <is splendid>.


============================================================
CHAPTER 6: Section 5: Koal <the call of> Adoan”oy <Hashem> shoavair <breaks> aruzeem <cedars>, va-yishabair Adoan”oy <and 
============================================================

5. Koal <the call of> Adoan”oy <Hashem> shoavair <breaks> aruzeem <cedars>, va-yishabair Adoan”oy <and Hashem broke> es <the> arzay <cedars of> haLivunoan <Lebanon>.


============================================================
CHAPTER 7: Section 6: Va-yarkeedaim <and He jounced (made them dance) them> kimoa <like> aigel <a calf of> Livunoan <Leban
============================================================

6. Va-yarkeedaim <and He jounced (made them dance) them> kimoa <like> aigel <a calf of> Livunoan <Lebanon (name of a mountain – Rashi)> viSeer-yoan <and (the mountain) Sirion (which pranced by the giving of the Torah, Rashi)> kimoa <like the> ben ri-aimeem <son of unicorns>.


============================================================
CHAPTER 8: Section 7: Koal <the call of> Adoan”oy <Hashem> choatzaiv <carves out> lahavoas aish <flames of fire>.
============================================================

7. Koal <the call of> Adoan”oy <Hashem> choatzaiv <carves out> lahavoas aish <flames of fire>.


============================================================
CHAPTER 9: Section 8: Koal <the call of> Adoan”oy <Hashem> yucheel midbar <makes the dessert tremble>, yucheel Adoan”oy Mi
============================================================

8. Koal <the call of> Adoan”oy <Hashem> yucheel midbar <makes the dessert tremble>, yucheel Adoan”oy Midbar Kudaish <Hashem makes the Dessert Kudaish tremble>.


============================================================
CHAPTER 10: Section 9: Koal <the call of> Adoan”oy <Hashem> yichoalail a-yu-loas <makes hinds tremble/give birth> va-yechso
============================================================

9. Koal <the call of> Adoan”oy <Hashem> yichoalail a-yu-loas <makes hinds tremble/give birth> va-yechsoaf <and it clears away> yi-u-roas <forests> oovihaichuloa <and in His chamber/Sanctuary> kooloa oamair <it all says/all say> kuvoad < (His) honor/glory>.


============================================================
CHAPTER 11: Section 10: Adoan”oy lamabool yushuv <Hashem sat (-reigned) during the flood> va-yaishev Adoan”oy <and Hashem wi
============================================================

10. Adoan”oy lamabool yushuv <Hashem sat (-reigned) during the flood> va-yaishev Adoan”oy <and Hashem will sit (-reign)> melech <king> li-oalum <forever>.


============================================================
CHAPTER 12: Section 11: Adoan”oy oaz li-amoa yeetain <Hashem will give might to His nation>, Adoan”oy yivuraich <Hashem will
============================================================

11. Adoan”oy oaz li-amoa yeetain <Hashem will give might to His nation>, Adoan”oy yivuraich <Hashem will bless> es amoa <His nation> vashaloam <with peace>.

Na Nach Nachma Nachman MayUman!

Prayer 31

“The kindnesses of Hashem forever I will sing from generation to generation I will make known Your faith with my mouth (Psalms 89:2).” And hereby I believe with complete faith in Your Unity and Oneness and the creation (ex nihilo) of the world, and in Your true tzadikim, and in Your holy Torah, in the Written Torah and in the Oral Torah, and in all the books of the true tzadikim, and in Your collective nation of Israel whom You chose. “For it is You, Hashem the Gd, in the heavens and in/on the earth and in the supernal heavens of heavens, (in) truth, it is You Who is first, and it is You who is last, and other than You there is no Gd,” and You created the heavens and the earth and all their (armies of) denizens, and upon it You created Adam Hureeshoan (-the first man/Adam) in the six days of creation, and on the seventh day You rested, and reposed, and relaxed. And from Your love, Hashem our Gd, and from Your great compassion for Your nation Israel, You gave us Your day of rest as an inheritance, a day of rest and holiness, a great and holy and awesome day, a day of repose and rest and relaxation for the bodies and the souls, for the physical and for the spiritual, in this world and in all the worlds (all of them). A day of the ascent of all the worlds to higher than their levels to the utmost supernal level, to the apex of the supernal holiness, to the “ravuh <desire> diravin <of desires> - will of wills. A day which no judgment has any hold, (and-) [nor] any hold of the Sitra Achra [-other-evil realm] and the kleepoas [(evil) husks] whatsoever, a day which is completely Shabbos (-rest), and good, and desire, and love, and kindness, and great extended/singular mercy, a day which is completely holy and awesome, which by its utter magnitude of its holiness of its very holy day we are able to bind to You and be included in Your unity, and to draw upon ourselves Your holy faith with the apex of completion, in all the six days of conduct (-the week).

And so I come before You Hashem my G-d and the G-d of my fathers, G-d of Abraham, G-d of Isaac, and G-d of Jacob, Ai”l Elyoan (-Supernal G-d), who meets out beneficial kindnesses, that You be gracious with me in/with Your true kindnesses, and [You should] merit me in Your abundant mercies, and help with full force, that I should merit in Your abundant mercies to receive the Shabbosoas (-Sabbaths) with great holiness, and with tremendous joy, and very, very great and enormous delight, as is befitting of a man of Israel (-Jew) to be joyous, and to rejoice, and to be happy full-scale on this great, and holy, and awesome day, on the day of the holy Shabbos, a day of rejoicing and happiness and delight in all the worlds (all of them), a day of the grand matrimonial celebration of the king and noblewoman, a day that there is no sadness, and agony, and dismay whatsoever, a day that even those condemned to Hell have respite on it, a day which is entirely light and good, a day that  supernal light radiates in all the worlds (all of them), “Light of the countenance of the King gives life (Proverbs 16:15),” a day which extra holy and awesome souls are drawn in, for each and every one of the Children of Israel Your nation. Our father our King, our Powerful One, our Creator, our Redeemer, our Maker, our Holy One, the Holy One of Jacob, sanctify us in/with the holiness of the holy Shabbos always, and help us to receive the Shabbosoas (Sabbaths) properly, and we should merit to honor and to bring exquisite delight to the Shabbos with all types of honor and exquisite delight, [be it/both] with food and beverage, that we should merit to abound on the holy Shabbos with good foods, and beverages, and all types of delicacies, and all types of exquisite delights, and we should not harbor any grievance on the expenses of the Shabbosoas and Holidays, and we shall be confident in You that You will fill for us all that we spend on the honor of Shabbos and the holy Holidays, and [be it] with respectable clothing, that we should merit in Your mercies to abundant Shabbos garments, to expensive clothing, clean, and holy, and pure, and (You should) merit us to (have) a nice abode in honor of the holy Shabbos, and to abound with candles on the night of the holy Shabbos.

And (You should) merit me in and guard me in Your abundant mercies from all the thirty-nine principle miluchoas (-work that is forbidden on Shabbos) and their toaldoas (-derivative counterparts), and protect us and save us that we should not foul with any miluchuh (-work that is forbidden on Shabbos by the) Torah (“di-oarayesuh”), nor with (the violation of) any shivoos (-abstention issued) by the Sages (“dirabunun”), on the holy day of Shabbos. And (You should) help us to sanctify our mouths and our speech on the Shabbos day, that our speech on Shabbos should not be like our speech on the weekday. Master of the World, have mercy on us, and sanctify us with all types of holiness of the holy Shabbos, with extremely great and enormous joy and delight, and with fear and love (of HY), until we merit to be included into the holiness of the holy Shabbos, and to draw the holiness of Shabbos onto the six days of the week, and we should merit to remember Shabbos always, as it is written (Exodus 20:8), “Remember the day of Shabbos to sanctify it.”

And (You should) merit us in Your abundant mercies to true complete faith always, that we should merit to believe in You, Hashem our G-d, and in Your holy written and oral Torah (“sheh-bichsav & sheh-baal-peh”), which You gave us through Moshe Your prophet, loyal of Your house, and in all Your true tzadikim that were in every single generation, and in all Your true tzadikim and truly kosher ones that are in this generation, and in the general aggregate of Your holy nation Israel in whom You take pride in every single generation. In all of them I should merit, in Your mercies, to believe with strong and certain consummate faith, and I should stand firmly viable in Your holy faith, and I should be strong in Your faith “like a solid mirror (Job 37:18),” I should never slip.

Master of the World, You know my bitter and impetuous heart, You know the very, very abundant hardships of our souls which are impossible to bear, You know the bitterness of our sighs/sorrows and our very numerous hardships, and our duress, and our suffering, and our frustration, and our distress. Ahuh (-woe) Hashem, ahuh (-woe) on our souls (-nefesh – lowest part of the soul, seated in the blood), oy (-a pity) on our spirit (-ruach – second, middle part of the soul), and our nishumoas (-highest of the three parts of the soul, seated in the intellect), oy (-a pity) and bitter it is for our bodies, behold we are screaming and sighing before You from the depth of the exile, from the depth of depth, like a man who was riddled with all types of arrows, and spears, and swords, and they are all still stuck in his body, and in every single limb are stuck many thousands and myriads of arrows, and spears, and projectiles/shrapnel anointed with all types of bitter drugs and harsh poisons, and many evil (-wild) beasts, and snakes, and scorpions encircle him from every side, and he is immured in imprisonment upon imprisonment, and thousands of thousands and myriads guard and ambushers stand over him and guard his whereabouts, and they do not allow him to lift his head even a hairbreadth, even for split second, and they shut his mouth, and confuse his mind, and pervert his heart at all times and at every instant so that he doesn’t cry out to You, and so that he doesn’t look for Your mercies, and so that he doesn’t hope for Your salvation. And I am impoverished and in pain far worse that all this that I mentioned before You, and my hardships, and the anguish of my soul, and the inflictions of my heart are very exceedingly abundantly more copious than all this, because there is no language in the world in which I can articulate my words (-what is on my mind). It is extremely bitter for me, Master of the entire universe, I am very bitter, my Father in Heaven, it is extremely bitter for me more than all the types of bitterness of the world, my soul is bitter, my heart moans over me, “my stomach my stomach quivers (Jeremiah 4:19),” “Hashem how plentiful are my tormentors, many rise up against me (Psalms 3:2).” And even though I know a little about all this, how my alienation and my fall is far, far deeper than the very deepest depth, what I cannot know at all, even still, every time that I want to speak of my copious torments, I am beset with conceit/self-interest, and haughtiness, and confusion to the extent that I cannot even say one word without conceit/self-interest and vast falsehood, and now, “from where will my help come (Psalms 121:1)?” From where can I seek for myself respite which will be eternally beneficial for me? From where can I seek saving and rescue? Look at my privation because numerous are my agonies and the troubles of my heart. “See my privation and release me (Psalms 119:153),” and with Your kindness alone give me life. “Until when Hashem will You forget me eternally? Until when will You hide Your countenance from me? Until when will I devise schemes with(in) my soul, (to be free of/with) anxiety in my heart by day? Until when will my enemies tower over me (Psalms 13:2-3)?”

And behold in my bitter privation, and my distress, and my duress, and my befuddlement, and my confusion, that with my copious sins I have become alienated the way I am alienated, and even when I remember sometimes to do some matter of holiness, it is full of wounds, depression, and confusion, and self-interest, and madness, and craziness of mind, in great abundance. And in the utter magnitude of my bitter exile I do not have any vitality, and consolation, and hope, except on (-with) Your holy and pure and wholesome faith, this is my consolation in my privation, what I merited nevertheless to be from the progeny of Israel Your servants, believers sons of believers. Therefore I have come to spread out my palms for Your true mercies and kindnesses, do not leave me and do not forsake me. Deal out to Your servant so that I shall live, deal with me with Your true kindnesses, and graciously endow me with Your holy faith always, that I should merit to be viably enduring and strong in Your holy faith always, without any confusion or deviation whatsoever, because we do not have any life or hope except on (-with) Your holy faith, as it is written (Habakkuk 2:4), “And a tzadik with/in his faith he lives.”

Master of the World, You know the utter magnitude of the prolific heresy and apostasy which prevails now in this time, in these generations at the heels of the (coming of the) Messiah, whose likes were never in the history of the world, and there is no one to stand up for us, and You guaranteed us (Tractate Chagiga 5b), “’Counsel is lost from the sons their wisdom has rotted (Jeremiah 49:7),’ that when there is no one in Israel to stand up and answer the apostates (apeekorsim), then so too shall the wisdom of the heretics and apostates be rotted as well.” And now in our abundant sins You have smitten us with a blow that is not written in the Torah, and You have made our blows wondrous from all sides. Because the true tzadikim who were able to draw for us consummate holy faith have passed away in (-due to) our sins, and the faction of the apostates and the philosophers are overly strengthening now, to the extent that they throw their evil arrows, and spread nets and traps as well upon the kosher and wholehearted ones, who are “invited and go wholesomely (-credulously innocent and unsuspecting) (Samuel 2:15:11).” Because they (-the heretics) mislead them, and show themselves before them as kosher, and as if they desire the benefit and rectification of Israel, until there are also many kosher souls caught in their their nets, and they insert heresy, and philosophy, and apostasy in the heart of Israel You holy nation, and they strengthen to habituate Israel in the ways of the pagans, to wear their clothing, and to go in their ways, and to study their books and their languages. “Oy (-woe) is to us that we have been marauded (Jeremiah 4:13),” because a calamity like this has never yet been in Israel in history, and upon whom do we have to support us, and to whom shall we flee to for help, and where is there a place to hide from them, and to save our children, and our progeny, and all the progeny of You nation the House of Israel from their nets and from their arrows? “Who of us can dwell with those who set the world on fire (Isaiah 33:14)?” Who will have compassion on us? Who will have mercy on us? From where will our help come from?

Master of the World, You alone know the utter magnitude of this plight, help us for upon You we are reliant, because we don’t have power except with our mouth (-words). Have mercy and compassion on us, and help us be strong and enduring in Your holy faith always, as is Your good will. And there should not rise in my heart any reasoning of their reasonings, nor any question of their questions, nor any way of their ways, just, I should merit, me, and my children, and all our fellows, and all of Your nation the House of Israel, to always go in the ways of our holy fathers, Avruhum, Yitzchuk, and Yaakoav, Moshe, and Aaron, Yosef, and Dovid, and in the ways of all the true prophets, the first ones and the later, and the Tana-im (-Sages of the Misna), and the Amoaru-im (-Sages of the Talmud), and in the ways of all the true tzadikim, and kosher ones, and the timeemim (-wholehearted, wholesome) that were in every single generation. And in their merit rescue us, and save us from all types of heresy, and confusion, and doubts, and merit us in Your mercies to strong and consummate faith, in truth, in holiness, and in purity always, forever.

And merit me, in Your abundant mercies, to give a lot of charity to many worthy paupers, and I should merit to abound very much in (giving) charity, with very great extravagance, and (You should) merit me to fulfill the verse which states (Psalms 112:9), “Extravagantly (/widely dispersed) he gave to the destitute, his righteousness stands forever.” And (You should) merit me to (give) charity of Shabbos, that I should merit to give worthy45 paupers for the needs of the holy Shabbos, and to host worthy guests by my table every holy Shabbos, and I should merit to draw upon myself the holiness of Shabbos always, and through this I should merit to perfect faith, to believe and to trust in You always, and to extravagantly disperse a lot of money to charity, with a good heart and great joy, so that it should be very important before You – my mitzva of charity, through the consummate faith that You merit me, which is the main importance and completeness of the charity and the whole entire Torah. And it should be fulfilled in me the verse which says (Genesis 15:6), “And he (Abraham) believed in Hashem, and He valued it for him as charity.” And I should merit that the light of my charity should radiate in great light through the holiness of the holy Shabbos, and it should be fulfilled in me the verse which says (Malachi 3:20), “And it will shine for you (-plural), fearers of My name, a sun of charity and healing in its wings.” And draw upon us blessing from the source of the blessings, and the blessing should be drawn from the holy faith which is drawn on the holy Shabbos upon all the six weekdays (“days of doing”), because it is the source of (the) blessing. And there should be drawn upon us bounty of goodness, and blessing, and mercy, and daas (-holy realization of knowledge), and life, and peace, and everything good, upon us and upon all Your nation Israel, always. And provide for us our livelihood (-parnassa) with great expansiveness before we need it, benignantly and not with pain, permissibly and not by what is prohibited, honorably and not with degradation, from under Your expansive and replete hand, and do not make me need to come onto the hand-outs of flesh and blood, nor to their loans.

And help me, and merit me to the guarding of the bris (-covenant, circumcision) in the utmost completion as is Your good will, and save me from now (on) in Your enormous mercies, and protect me with You great and awesome kindnesses, from all types of defection of the bris that are in the world, that I should not defect with/in the drops of my brain Heaven forbid, neither unintentionally (-bishoagaig), nor intentionally (-bimaizid), nor through subjugation (-bi’oaness), nor willfully, and pardon me, and forgive me, and atone me for all the I defected the holy bris (-covenant, circumcision) from my youth till today, and merit me quickly to complete rectification of the bris, with holiness and with purity, as is Your good will.

And (You should) save me with Your abundant mercies from the dangers of travel, and guard me and save me from all types of pain, and suffering, and hinderance on the way, and from all ambush, and enemy, and adversary (/tempter), and be with me always, when I sit/reside in my house, and when I go on the way, in/with Your name I will depart to go to/for peace and in/with Your name I will traverse the way in/with peace, and I will return to my house to/for peace. And save me from all types of harm and losses on the way, physical and spiritual, body and soul and money. And guard our departures and our arrivals for good life and for peace from now and forever, and (You should) merit me to give charity before I depart on the way, as it is written (Psalms 85:14), “Righteousness goes before him, and he sets his steps to the way.” And through this ready the way before me. And You in Your abundant mercies, go before me to lead the way for me to go on, and illuminate before me with Your great light, and bring me, and have me reach my desired destination to/for life, and for peace, as is Your good will.

And in this vein, (You should) have mercy on me in Your abundant mercies, and be gracious to me in Your great kindnesses, and guard me and save me from all types of prohibitions, of the Torah and of the Sages. And (You should) merit me to engage in Your holy Torah always, day and night, and (You should) help me study with great diligence the books of the poaskim (-deciders of the Halacha), and be with me always, and graciously bestow me from Yourself, realization of knowledge, understanding, and intellect, to clarify all the laws of (what is) forbidden and permitted, and I should merit to know clearly all the laws correctly, so that I should merit through this to cull the good from the bad, the kosher from the unfit, the pure from the impure, the permissible from the prohibited. And (You should) merit me to learn in great holiness and purity, to learn, and to teach, to keep, and to do, and to fulfill all the words of Your Torah with love in great holiness, and I should merit to be a tzadik and a lamdan (-skilled-keen scholar) in truth, and (You should) merit me to guarding and rectification of the bris (-covenant, circumcision) in all its aspects, in the utmost perfection, to guarding of the supernal bris and to guarding of the lower bris, in truly great holiness and purity.

And in this vein (You should) merit me in Your abundant mercies, and help me and save me always, and merit me to holy yearning, that I should yearn and long constantly for You, and yearn cherishingly to the devotion of You in truth, and to fear You, and to love You, and the whole entire day my  passion, and my hope, and my yearning, and my cherishing longing should be just for You and the devotion of You in truth, and my eyes should pine the whole day to attain true devotion of You, as it is written (Psalms 119:81-), “My soul pine for Your salvation, for Your words I put my hope.” “My soul desires yearningly and also pines for the courtyards of Hashem, my heart and my flesh will sing praises to the living G-d (Psalms 84:3).” “My flesh and my heart desire/pine (for You) Rock of my heart and my portion is G-d forever (Psalms 73:26).” “My soul thirsts for You, my flesh yearns for You, in an arid land, and weary without water (Psalms 63:2).” “My soul thirsts for G-d, for the living Almighty, when will I come and (I will) see the countenance of G-d (Psalms 42:3).”

“Father, Father, Chariot of Israel,” Father, Father, my Master, my King, and my G-d, Rock of my heart and my holy [One], You know the utter magnitude of our alienation from You now, which is impossible to label the alienation in any language of the world, and we have no support, just to yearn, and to long, and to yearn cherishingly for You, and to await Your salvation, and to hope for Your mercies, as You revealed to us through Your true tzadikim, that the holy yearning and longing are of themselves very good, therefore I have come to request from before You, Hashem my G-d, and G-d of my fathers, Whose desire is in my rectification, and who endeavors in my saving, that You should merit me in Your abundant mercies, and habituate me to yearn, and to long, and to yearn cherishingly for You always, truly and with a complete heart. And (You should) save me with Your abundant mercies, and protect me, and rescue my soul from all types of evil yearning, and from all types of evil longing and cherishing yearning, and from all types of bad desires and thoughts, and there should not arise on (-in) my heart any bad yearning and longing whatsoever from now and forever.

And (You should) help me in Your abundant mercies that I should merit to speak, to enunciate with my mouth the my good longings and cherishing yearnings, and (You should) help me always to express my words (-what is on my mind) before You with all (my) heart and soul, and I should merit to abound in hisbodidus and in conversation between myself and my Maker always, and I should merit to pour out all my words (-what is on my mind) before You always, and all that is with (-on) my heart I will converse before You Merciful One, with truth and sincerity (timeemus), with great longing and vigorous yearning for You, until I merit to make many souls of holiness through my holy yearning that I merit to express and to enumerate verbally explicitly every single day, set (in stone) and irrevocable/not to be skipped. And I should merit to make through this, holy nekoodoas (-vowels (literally: dots)) for the letters of the Torah, and to depict (-delineate, form, construct, fashion, draw) the letters of the Torah positively (-for the good), and by me, all the words of the holy Torah should be made a drug of life, and I should merit to bond (divaikus) to You and to Your devotion always, forever. And (You should) guard me and save me always that there should not transmigrate nor attach to me or my progeny any bad soul, Heaven forbid, which are made from bad yearning Heaven forbid, and (You should) help me that there should go forth from me always abundant holy and good souls, through our good yearning that we express with our mouths, and these souls should gain power, and they should arouse the whole entire world to true complete repentance, until everyone returns to You to truly do Your will.

And in this vein, (You should) have mercy on us, and save us, and merit us to eat with great and awesome holiness, until our eating is in the aspect of the lechem hapunim (-“bread of faces,” set on the Shulchan-Table in the Temple), and (You should) help us that all the pagans and all the stars and constellations, should all toil for our parnassa (-livelihood), and remove their protection from them, and there should be a fulfillment of the verse (Numbers 14:9), “their protection has been removed from above them, and Hashem is with us, do not fear them.” And (You should) annul the wisdom of nature from the world, and uproot, and break, and annul their mistaken ideologies from the world, and reveal Your kingship and Your providence to all who traverse the world, and everyone should know that there is not any nature whatsoever, just, everything runs with Your providence alone. And shine upon us with the light of Your countenance, and to do not hide Your countenance from us. “Shine Your countenance on Your servant, save me in/with Your kindness (Psalms 31:17).” “And everything that has been made should know that You made it, and everything that was formed should understand that Your formed it (Shmoaneh Esray of Rosh Hashana),” and all should know that You oversee with specific providence over everything that is in the world, with specific detail at all times and every instant, and there is no phenomena of nature in the world whatsoever, just everything if from You alone. “Turn to me and be gracious to me, give Your might to Your servant, and save the son of Your maidservant (Psalms 86:16).” “Your countenance shine in Your servant, and teach me Your statutes (Psalms 119:135).” “Raise (flauntingly) upon us the light of Your countenance Hashem (Psalms 4:7).” And annul the wisdom of nature, the wisdom of the stars and constellations, which are drawn from the hiddenness of the countenance of Hashem, from the world. And reveal the reality of the wisdom of the management of the countenance of Your supervision of/in the world, how the light of the countenance of Hashem “draped shieldingly upon us all day (Deuteronomy 33:12),” and (how He) runs His world with specific supervision, with wondrous and awesome wisdom which is impossible to comprehend, and hides for the time being His management in the phenomena of nature. And all shall know that nature itself as well – You manage/rule with Your supervision alone, and nature as well is providence. And be merciful on us, and draw even now the administration that will be in the future, when nature will be annulled completely, and You will run Your world with Your providence alone, and we should merit even now that Your should administer us with Your providence alone, without any ways of nature whatsoever.

And (You should) help us that our eating should be with great holiness, so much so that our table (shulchan) will be for an atonement for us like the alter (mizbayach), and it should be said on/of our table (Ezekiel 41:22), “This is the table which is before Hashem.”

And (You should) hasten and hurry to redeem us with eternal redemption, and bring us our righteous Messiah, and build for us our holy and magnificent house (-Temple), “and there we will ascend, and we will make our appearance, and we will bow before You on the three foot-pilgrimage seasons, as is written in Your Torah (Deuteronomy 16:16-17), ‘Three times in the year all your males are to appear before Hashem your G-d in the place that He shall choose, on the Festival of the Matzoas (-Passover), and on the Festival of the Shavuos, and on the Festival of the Succos, and they should not appear before Hashem emptyhanded. A man (will bring) according to the gift of his hand, according to the blessing of Hashem your G-d which he gave you.’ (Musaf of the Festivals).” And we should merit to set in the holy Temple the lechem hapunim (-bread of faces – show/display bread) before You always. And take the sun out of its casing, and reveal the sun in its (full) power, and sanctify us with Your supernal holiness, and give us strength to receive the actual light of the sun which You will reveal in the future, in its (full) force and power, and heal us through it from all our sicknesses, and from all our pains, a healing of the soul, and a healing of the body. And (You should) rectify in Your mercies all the defects that we defected before You in all the worlds (all of them), and there should be a fulfillment of the verse which states (Malachi 3:20), “And it will shine for you (-plural) fearers of My Name a sun of charity and healing in its wings.” And insert the bounty and parnassa (-livelihood, income) from the outside inside, into the holiness, and the prodigious bounty and parnassa should no longer go to the pagans and the wicked Heaven forbid, just, all the good bounty, and the parnassa, and the wealth should be extended to us from You. And fulfill for us the verse which states (Deuteronomy 28:12), “Hashem will open for you His good storage, the heavens, to give the rain of your land in its time, and to bless all your undertakings, and you will lend out to many nations, but you will not borrow.” “Because Hashem your G-d blessed you like He said to (/for) you, and you will lend out to many nations, but you will not borrow, and you will rule over many nations, but over you they will not rule (Deuteronomy 15:6).”

Have mercy and compassion on us, and fill our wishes/requests with mercy, and merit us to the holiness of the holy Shabbos, and to true guarding of the bris (-covenant, circumcision), and to guarding (the laws of the) forbidden and the permitted, and to true holy consummate faith, and graciously bestow us from Yourself, wisdom, understanding, and daas (-holy realization of knowledge), and dole out upon us always the attribute of mercy, and we should merit to have mercy on others (-“the living creations”), to give a lot of charity with great joy to many worthy45 paupers. And help us, and merit us to holy yearning, and vigorous longing for Your name and for Your service in truth, always. And give us our parnassa (-livelihood, income) with great expansiveness from Your full and expansive hand, in order that we merit to engage in Your Torah and in Your service, and do Your will in truth all the days of our lives, we, and our progeny, and the progeny of Your nation the House of Israel, from now and forever, until we merit to cling (-divaikus) and to be included in You always, to ascend and to appear in the light of Your countenance, “G-d will be gracious with us, and will bless us, He will shine His countenance with (-upon) us, selah (Psalms 67:2).” And keep for us “the loyal kindnesses of David (Isaiah 55:3),” and fulfill for us the verse which states, “Forever I will preserve for him My kindness, and My covenant will be steadfast for him (Psalms 89:29).” And we shall see Him with our very eyes (-with certitude) when He returns to His home, as it is written (Isaiah 52:8), “Because eye in eye (-with their very eyes, i.e. with certitude) they will see when Hashem returns to Zion,” and it says (Isaiah 40:5), “And the glory of Hashem will be revealed, and all flesh will see together that the mouth of Hashem spoke.” And it says (Isaiah 30:20), “And your Teacher (-HY) will no longer be cloaked, and your eyes will see your Teacher.” “Hashem, G-d of Hosts, bring us back, shine Your countenance and we will be saved (Psalms 80:20).”

“Yihih-yoo lirutzoan <may they be pleasing – arousing the Divine Will> imray fee <the words of my mouth> vihegyoan leebee <and the expressions of my heart> lifunechuh <before You> Hashem tzooree <my Rock/Maker> vigoa-allee <and my Redeemer> (Psalms 19:15).”

Na Nach Nachma Nachman MayUman!

Prayer 34

“My mouth will speak wisdoms, and the ruminations of my heart - comprehensions (Psalms 49:4).” “G-d hear my prayer listen to the words of my mouth (Psalms 54:4),” “The offerings of my mouth please find favorable (now) and Your statutes teach me (Psalms 119:108).” “Listen Hashem to my prayer and hear (-accept) the call of my entreaties (Psalms 86:6).” “Hear Hashem the call of my entreaties when I cry out to You, when I lift my hands up to Your holy sanctuary (Psalms 28:2).” “Do not incline my heart to a bad thing, to connive (/perform) evil schemes with personages perpetrators of iniquity, and let me not break bread in their luscious feasts (Psalms 141:4).” “A crooked heart should turn away from me, evil, I shall not know (Psalms 101:4).” “Incline my heart to Your testimonies and not to profiting (Psalms 119:36).” “A pure heart create for me G-d, and a correct spirit make/renew inside me (Psalms 51:12).” Help me Master of the World, Master of the entire universe, that I should merit to attach my heart to the words of my mouth, so that my heart will be (-sincerely feel) as (the words of) my mouth, and save me in Your abundant mercies so that I do not speak before You deceitful words, and my heart should not be incongruous from the words of my mouth, and I should merit to pour out my words (-what is on my mind), and my prayer, and my entreaty, and my supplication before You with a fully articulated mouth and a whole heart, to the extent that my heart should connect to the words of my mouth in my entreaties and in my supplications, and be with me always, and (You should) save me, and help me, and merit me to express all my words (-what is on my mind) before You always with all (my) heart, and all that is with (-on) my heart I will converse before You always, truthfully and with a whole heart, and I should merit to do a very great deal of hisbodidus and conversing between me and my Maker, until there will be revealed and illuminated the holy point which is rooted in me which is is the aspect of the dominion of the tzadik, as it is written (Isaiah 60:21), “And Your nation, they are all tzadikim.” And this holy point will radiate and rule through the words of my mouth in prayers, and entreaties, and supplications. And I should merit to bind my heart to this holy point with a durable and strong attachment, to the extent that this holy point will illuminate from my mouth to my heart, until there will be revealed the light of holy love for Hashem Yisburach which is rooted in me, and through this there will be nullified and there will fall away from my heart the derision of the heart, foreskin of the heart, brokenness of the heart, which are all the bad desires, and bad traits, and bad thoughts, and improper musings, and confusions which reign on my heart, to the extent that my entire heart is broken, and destroyed, and very, very messed up on account of these abundant ignominies. And all of them should be nullified from me completely through the light of the holy point which is in me, that You should merit me that it should be revealed and illuminate from my mouth to my heart, through the words of the entreaties, and supplications, and the arousal for You and Your devotion, that I should merit to say them truthfully and with a whole heart, from the depth of the heart, with real truth.

Please Hashem, abundantly Merciful One, He Who has compassion on the poor, Who hears the moaning of the destitute, Who sees the humiliation of the humiliated, Who desires the repentance of the wicked and doesn’t desire their death, “You know my disgrace, and my shame, and my mortification, before You are all my adversaries (Psalms 69:20).” “Contemptuous derision broke my heart and I am very debilitated, and I hope for some acknowledgment of empathy and/but there is none, and for consolers and/but I didn’t find (anyone) (Psalms 69:21).” “Behold I am before You (like a vessel) full of shame and mortification,” full of derisions and disgraces, “What can I say, what can I speak, and what justification can I offer? Have mercy and compassion on me, “Remove the derision of my [sin] from which I fear [retribution] because Your statutes are for betterment (Psalms 119:39).” Merit me to do return in true complete repentance before You. Merit me to express my words (-what is on my mind) before You truly and wholeheartedly, in such a way that I can arouse the good point within me, and it will radiate in me from my mouth to my heart, in such a way that I will merit to rectify my very defected heart. And I should merit to remove and nullify from my heart all the derisions of the heart, and all the foreskins of the heart, and all the crookedness that is in my heart, because my heart is full of very evil crookedness, without measure, and quantification, and number. “The heart is most perverse and it is extremely sick, who can fathom it? And You Hashem probe the heart and test the kidneys (Jeremiah 17:9-10),” heal my brokenness and bandage my soul’s very numerous ailments, have mercy and compassion on me Master of the World, because You know the evil of my heart, and the evil perversion which took hold and blended into my heart, to the extent that my entire heart is full of very, very many (improper) musings, and (bodily) desires, and confusions without measure, and quantification, and number, to the extent that it is difficult for me to rest and relax for one hour, because at all times and hours the (bodily) desires and confusions pursue (after) me, and deride and break my heart, to the extent that I don’t know any way, or path, or aitzuh (recourse, advice, remedy), or scheme how to escape them, and even what still does sparkle for me some flickering of good aitzoas (-recourse, remedies, advice), I don’t fulfill them due to the utter magnitude of my discouragement, and the dispersion of the heart and the soul.

Master of the World, it is very bitter for me, You know my enormous bitterness, You know my derision and the bad temperament of my heart in all its aspects, in all its details and specifics, and there is no one who can heal me, just You alone Hashem my G-d and the G-d of my fathers, in/with Your true kindnesses alone, with unconditional kindness alone, even though I don’t merit to speak even these words truthfully, as You know, because they deride me with all types of derision and shaming, “All who see me scorn me, they cluck with their lips, they shake their head (Psalms 22:8).” “The whole day my mortification is before me, and the shame of my face covers me. From the call of the mocking haranguer and blasphemer, from before the enemy and the avenger (Psalms 44:16-17).” And at all times and every moment my mind and heart are laced with all types of derision and disparagement. And it doesn’t stop with what they deride me, and break my heart with all types of bad desires, and vices, and bad and disgusting musings, also, even in the midst of this when I want to raise my eyes a little to You, and to utter my words for Your mercies and Your benevolences, all the while my heart is full of self-interest, and great confusions, and haughty spirit, through which my prayer is despised by You G-d forbid, as it is written (Proverbs 16:5), “It is an abomination to Hashem all haughty of heart.” And now what can I do and what can I carry out, to where can I run for help? Look at my affliction/poverty for many are my pains and the hardships of my heart. However, even still I hope and await for Your many mercies and for Your hidden kindnesses, because You know what is hidden in my heart and the very root of my good point, that in the real truth I have a root (of a) good, and holy, and pure point, because I am from the progeny of the House of Israel, and my soul is rooted in the soul of the true tzadik who is the soul of the aggregate soul of the Children of Israel. Hence, in the real truth, in the immanent root of my good point, I scream to You in truth and with a complete heart, that You have compassion on me, and mercy on me, and benevolently grant me from the treasure-house of matnas cheenum (-ex gratia/unconditional gifting), and help me to remove from myself the foreskin of my heart, and the brokenness of my heart, and the derision of my heart. And I should merit to really truly incline my heart to You, and to break, and to nullify from my heart all the bad desires, and bad traits, and crookedness of the heart, and evil (temperament) of the heart. And return me in complete repentance before You, truthfully and wholeheartedly, and I should merit quickly/soon to a pure heart, to a good heart, to a holy heart, to a wholesome heart, as is Your good desire.

And in this vein I have come before You Hashem my G-d and the G-d of my fathers, Ruler over everything, (that) You created Your world with Your good will, for Your nation Israel, in order that Israel would receive the Torah, and through this they would merit to rule over You so to speak, as it is written (Samuel 2:23:3 as interpreted by the Talmud in Moed Kuttun 16b), “the tzadik rules over [the fear of] G-d,” and it is written (Psalms 114:2), “Israel His ruler.” Therefore to You I will turn and it is You I beseech, before You I will entreat, before You I will prostrate in keeduh (-upon one’s face), with kreyuh (-of the knees), with hishtachavuyuh (-outspreading of the hands and feet, until one is flat out on the ground), with bowed head, with humbled enterprisingness, with fright, with fear, with trembling and sweat, with a heart broken, and crushed, and woeful, and wretched, “pushed around and deplorable/haggard/hair torn out (Isaiah 18:2).” Rock of Israel and his Holy One, redeemer of Israel, have mercy on us for the sake of Your name, and merit us with Your enormous kindnesses to draw close and to bind (ourselves) to the true tzadikim who are the root of the general aggregate of the souls of Israel. And (You) should merit me to speak with them face to face (-“mouth to mouth (Numbers 12:8)”), and to hear from their holy mouths holy words, and they should speak upon (-to) my heart words that are in consonance with the heart, and I should merit to bind my heart to the holy words of their mouth, to their holy point, and their holy point of their mouths should rule and radiate to my heart, and through this all the derisions of the heart, and all the foreskin of the heart, and all the perversion of the heart will be nullified from my heart, and my heart will be straight with Hashem always.

And in this vein, [You] should merit me to speak with Israel Your holy nation at large, about Torah, and worship, and fear of Heaven, until I merit to receive beneficial illumination and arousal for Hashem Yisburach from all the (unique) holy points that are in each and every single one of Israel, what there is not in his friend. And we should merit that there will be love and great peace between all of Israel Your nation, and each and every one will speak with his friend about fear of Heaven, until all of us, You nation the House of Israel, will be integrated one another with love, and brotherhood, and comradery, and every one will receive from his friend arousal for Hashem Yisburach from the holy point that his friend has more than him, and we should receive one from another, and we should arouse each other to Your worship and Your Torah in absolute truth.

And [You should] merit me in Your abundant mercies, myself, and my children, and children’s children, and your entire nation the House of Israel, that we should merit, each and every one, to speak between himself and his Maker, and we should arouse our hearts to (have) fear of Heaven, and we should merit always to express our words (-what is on our minds) before You every single day in the spoken language, with mercy evoking great pleaful entreating, and with words of appeasement and plentiful mollification, and with solid/correct argumentation and justifications, and with truly great arousal, and with endearing and touching words, until we merit to bind our hearts to the hold point within us, which is the aspect of the domination of the tzadik. And we should merit to supplicate copiously before You, and to abound profusely every single day in “seechuh <conversing>” which is tifeeluh <prayer> (Avoaduh Zuruh 7b), and we should merit to say before You every single day many, many entreaties, and requests, and confessions, and prayers, and implorings, and we should strengthen and embolden ourselves with prayer and entreaties with all (our) might and forces. And we should not give You respite until You are gracious to us, we will call to You until You answer us, until we arouse Your true mercies upon us, and we merit to be victorious over You with our prayers, and our entreaties, and our conversing, that You return Your countenance to us and You have mercy on us, and You return us in true complete repentance before You with complete heart and soul. And You should merit us that all these three holy points radiate in us, (the three being-) the radiance of the holy point of the true tzadik of the generation, and the radiance of the holy point of Your nation Israel in general, each one to his friend, that each one will illuminate in his friend the radiance of the holy point that he has in him what his friend doesn’t (have in him), and the radiance of the holy point of each one in himself, that each and every single one will receive from himself from the holy point that he has in himself, that it should illuminate from is mouth to his heart through speaking between himself and his Creator with arousal of the heart, in prayer, and conversing (with Gd), and entreaty, and supplication with truth and wholeheartedness, and through all this we should merit that the radiance of the tzadik who is the foundation of the world (Proverbs 10:25) will radiate in our hearts, and we should merit that our hearts will be truly connected with a strong and durable bond for all eternity to the light of these three holy points which is where the light of the love and the kindness is shoaruh (presides-pervades-fluxes), until through this there will be nullified  all the denigrations which are shoareh (preside-pervade-flux) on the heart which are called foreskin of the heart, breakage of the heart, which are all the bad desires and bad thoughts, and I should merit to truly purify my heart from all crookedness of the heart, and from all types of heresy of the heart, and from all evil of the heart. And (You should) help me to break and to nullify all the bad desires, and all the bad thoughts, and all types of bad musings, and all types of confusions, and all types of dregs and turbidity of the heart, until I merit to a pure heart, to a holy heart, to a good heart, to a straight heart, in the utmost truth, as is Your will and as is the will of the true tzadikim. And my heart should be straight with Hashem always, until I merit to be attached (divaikus) to You, and to be included in Your good desire. And with Your great love cover over all our (willful) sins, as it is written (Proverbs 10:12), “and over all (willful) sins) love covers.” And pardon, and forgive, and atone us for all our sins, erring, and (willful) sins, and gather away our denigrations, and from now (on) be to our aid that we should not ever sin anymore, neither unintentionally nor intentionally, neither by coercion nor willfully, and save us from all types of defects that are in the world, and we should merit to be truly as Your good will.

And merit me to sanctify my mouth with holy speech, and help me rectify all the defects which I defected with my mouth, until I merit that my mouth will be fill with the blessing of Hashem, and my mouth should be filled with Your praise. And my vessels of shefa (provisions and bounty), which are the words of my mouth, should be with great completeness, until I merit to always draw shefa (provisions, bounty) of goodness, and blessings, and mercy, and life, and peace through the words of my mouth. And (You should) always listen to our prayers, and abnegate Your will before our will, so that can decree with our words and it will be enacted, and there should be a fulfillment of the verse which writes, “I am Hashem your Gd who took you up from the Land of Egypt, widen (-express and elaborate with) your mouth and I will fill it (Psalms 81:11).” And (You should) help us with Your mercies that we merit quickly to true holiness of the bris (-circumcision, covenant), and we merit to rectify all types of defects of the bris that we defected until now. And the merit of Josef the tzadik who withstood the test, and the merit of the true tzadikim who withstood many countless tests, and they subjugated their (bad) inclinations (yetzer) for the sake of Your name, should protect us. And in their merit and their power (You should) help me from now (on), Hashem my Gd and the the Gd of my fathers, that I should merit also to subjugate my inclination and my desire. And (You should) save me with Your mercies from all types of defects of the bris that are in the world, so that I shall not be embarrassed, and I will not blunder in any pitfall or bad thought whatsoever from now on forever, and (You should) merit me quickly to true and complete rectification of the bris as is Your good will, and I should merit to rectify consummately the bris (-covenant) of the tongue and the bris (-covenant, circumcision) of the pudendum. And (You should) graciously endow us from Yourself, holy wisdom, and understanding, and realization of knowledge, and I should merit to learn and to teach (Torah) with great diligence, and to fulfill all the words of Your Torah with love. Have pity and be gracious with us, and have mercy on us, and fill all our wishes with mercy, be gracious with us, and answer us, and listen to our prayers, because You listen to the prayers of every mouth of Your nation Israel with mercy, blessed are You Who listens to prayer.

“Yihih-yoo lirutzoan <may they be pleasing – arousing the Divine Will> imray fee <the words of my mouth> vihegyoan leebee <and the expressions of my heart> lifunechuh <before You> Hashem tzooree <my Rock/Maker> vigoa-allee <and my Redeemer> (Psalms 19:15).”

Na Nach Nachma Nachman MayUman!

Prayer 38

“My soul cleaves (divaikus) after You, Your right (hand) supported me (Psalms 63:9),” “I clung (divaikus) to Your testimonies Hashem do not shame me (Psalms 119:30).” My father, Merciful Father, help me in Your abundant mercies and Your great kindnesses, that I merit to bind (divaikus) myself to You always at all times, honestly, and with complete faith, and with correct and settled mind, with holiness and with great purity. And I should merit to examine myself at all times (to check) if I am truly bound (divaikus) to Hashem Yisburach, until I merit to fulfill the mitzvah of (Deuteronomy 10:20) “oovoah (and in Him) sidbuk (You should cling),” in the utmost perfection as is Your good desire.

And merit me in Your abundant mercies to fulfill the mitzva of Tefillin properly, with all of its technicalities, and intricacies, and intentions, and 613 mitzvoas which are contingent upon it, and I should merit to don every day kosher and holy Tefillin from an upright and truly righteous scribe, and they should be written with great holiness and intense and awesome kavana (-intention, concentration, meaning) as is befitting to cogitate when writing the Tefillin and (configuring) their rectifying properties. And the writing of the parsheyoas (-the four paragraphs, excerpts from the Torah), and the straps, and their stitching with sinews, and all the rectifying properties of the Tefillin, everything should be done in the best and most beautiful manner according to the laws of the holy Torah. And my Tefillin should always be kosher in all the details of their laws, and overly beautiful in the paragon of beauty and finesse, and holy with the utmost holiness. And I should merit to put on Tefillin of Rashi and Tefillin of Rabbainu Tam every single day. And I should merit to place them in their proper position on the head and on the arm, with bountiful joy, and very, very great and enormous happiness, and with great enormous and awesome kavana, and with great arousal with great joy, until I merit that there should be drawn upon me great enormous holiness, through donning the very, very holy and awesome Tefillin, and there will be drawn upon me the holiness of the Tefillin from their supernal root in Your supernal holiness, to the extent that I merit to truly great bonding (divaikus) to You through the mitzva of Tefillin. And I will not be absentminded ever from the Tefillin, and I will not speak any idle prattle when I am crowned with Tefillin, with the crown of the supernal King, with the girding of the supernal weapon(s). And I should merit to be crowned with the diadem, splendid crown of the holy Tefillin, with great and enormous fear and awe, with a good heart, and with bountiful joy and great happiness, in such a way that I will merit to fulfill the mitzva of Tefillin with befitting mastery, as is Your good desire, until I merit to be attached (divaikus) to You Blessed One always through the holiness of the awesome Tefillin. Our Father Who Is In Heaven, who has compassion on the poor, have compassion on us, and help us and graciously grant us with the holiness of the Tefillin, and just like you merited us, and gave us this great mitzva through the hands of Moshe Your servant, so too You should be gracious to us and merit us with Your mercies to fulfill, truly and with great perfection, this mitzva of Tefillin. And we should merit to be bound (divaikus) to You always, and our sins should not cause a stoppage/division Heaven forbid between us and You, because You are the G-d of forgiveness. And in Your abundant mercies merit us to return in true complete repentance to You, and we should merit to always be truly abashed from You over the utter magnitude of our (intentional) sins and our transgressions against You blessed One. And with Your great kindness pardon us for all our sins, and our transgressions, and (intentional) sins that we transgressed and (willfully) infracted before You, from the day we were on this earth until today. And with Your mercies rectify all the defections that we defected in Your great name, so that we should merit to truly draw upon ourselves always the holiness of the Tefillin, so that we merit to be always bound to You with wondrous and powerful bonding (divaikus), with true determination, and passion, and craving, and desire, and great love for You, as is Your good desire, as it is written (Psalms 119:81), “My soul yearns (even to its expiration) for Your salvation, for (the fulfillment of) Your word I await”. “My flesh and my heart are obsessed for You, Rock of my heart, and my portion is G-d, forever (Psalms 73:26).” “One thing I request from Hashem, it I will seek, my attendance (lit: sitting) in the House of Hashem all the days of my life, to behold the pleasantness of Hashem, and to visit in His (royal) chamber/Sanctuary (Psalms 27:4).”

And in this vein may there be will before You Hashem our G-d and the G-d of our fathers, that You help me, and guard me, and save me from evil words, and/so I should not defect the words of my mouth ever, and there should not leave my mouth any evil word on any Israelite in the world, and I shall not inquire after the shortcomings of people, just, You should help me and incline my heart that I merit to inquire always after the every merit and goodness that there is to find in each and every one of Israel, even in the worst of the worst, and I should merit to labor and exert myself over this, to bore through to find some merit even in the least of the least. And be with me always, and help me that I should succeed to merit to find in them always a meritorious and favorable side, and I should merit to judge every person favorably always. And save me in Your abundant mercies from the very great and severe sin, which is the sin of lushoan hura (-evil tongue/speech) and talebearing (“richeeloos”) which is exceedingly grave, tantamount to the three biggest sins of the Torah which are, idolatry, and licentiousness, and spilling blood (-murder), and the sin of lushoan hura (-evil tongue/speech) is the equivalent of all of them. Master of the Entire Universe, have mercy on me for Your sake, and be with my mouth always when I speak. And merit me that I should guard the openings of my mouth that there shouldn’t leave my mouth any word of lushoan hura or residual (“avak”) lushon hurah on any Israelite in the world, and not any improper word, and save me from all types of evil talk, from lushoan hura, and from talebearing (“richeeloos”), and from idle prattle, and from mockery, and from fawning, and from lying, and from revealing a secret that is not supposed to be revealed, and from vulgar language, and from revealing and saying words/insights of Torah and fear of Heaven in a place or in a time that is not proper to say them and reveal them, and from all types of not good words, and from all types of “hevel peh” (vapors, breath of the mouth) which defect the holy speech which is the spirit of the mouth of the Holy One Blessed He. Our Father Who Is In Heaven, “What can we say before You who Dwells In The Heaven, and what can we recount before You who Resides In The Heaven,” because from the frequency with which we are used to defected speech we don’t know any way how to distance ourselves from them from now on. Therefore I have come before You Hashem my G-d and the G-d of my fathers, that You should help me in You mercifulness, and guide me, and show me a straight (-upright) way, in such a fashion that I will merit to guard myself with Your mercies, so that I won’t foul up with any words that aren’t good, and I will not say something which isn’t as You desire. And help me be good to all always, and I shall not ever pry after the shortcomings of people Heaven forbid, just, on the contrary, I shall merit to always strive with full force, and strength, and might to always find merit and good in every single one of the Children of Israel Your holy nation, even in the least of the least, even in the lowest of the low, even in the antagonists and those who are out to get me, all of them, I shall merit with Your mercies to always judge them favorably, and give me intelligence and da’as (holy realization of knowledge) from You (to know) how to search and to find in them always merit and good points.

And save me in Your mercies from the “realm of the end of all flesh,” from all the evil people who are the brazen faced of the generation, who inquire and search always after the shortcomings of people, and always seek to find guilt and fault in each and every one. Master of the World, save us in Your mercies from them and their crowd, and don’t listen to their words and their accusations should not ascend at all before You, and seal the partition before their evil words, and their words should not enter Your ears whatsoever. Because You know their evil heart, and they stand against us all the time and denounce us, and desire to distance us Heaven forbid from Your true service, and from them stem and come upon us all the prosecutions, and the trials, and the confusions, through which we have been alienated from Your true devotion. Master of the World, Master of the World, You know everything that transpired over us until now, and everything that transpires over us all the time, every day, and every hour, because many have risen exceedingly against us. “Hashem, how numerous are my aggressors/hardships, many rise up against me (Psalms 3:2).” “They engulf me like water, the entire day they surround me unanimously (Psalms 88:18).” And I know the truth Hashem my G-d and the G-d of my fathers, that “with me – I am the owner (-responsible for) the sin (Samuel 1:25:24),” and “I caused all of this to my soul/life (-based on Samuel 1:22:22),” through not controlling myself, and I defected the/with covenant of the tongue and the/with covenant of the flesh (-circumcision), and through these defections there were extended to them words, that they have the power to speak, and to slander, and to bring accusations Heaven forbid against the Children of Israel, Your nation, particularly when they are in castigated effacement from before You on account of their transgressions, and (intentional), and wrongdoings, even though they real did sin before You, even still it is not Your desire that they should prosecute Israel Heaven forbid. And You choose, and draw close, and are affectionate to anyone who has mercy then on Israel and engages in propounding their merit in that time, and has self-sacrifice (-meseeras nefesh) to pray ardently for them, and to implore You on their behalf, like Moshe Rabbainu r.i.p. who had miseeras nefesh (self-sacrifice) for Israel, and prayed for them always, even when they did what they did, and You in Your mercies always heard his prayer, and cherished him with all types of affection because of this. And behold now, due to our sins, “The pious have vanished from the land and an upright man is nonexistent (Micah 7:2),” “And there is no one who can stand up for us.” And as if that is not enough, additionally many rise against us, very many, as You know, “Upon whom do we have to rely on? Upon our Father Who is in Heaven (Mishna end of Tractate Sota).” He who is compassionate on the poor, have compassion on our poverty, and see our lowliness and our degradation. “Look from the Heavens and see that we have been the subject of scorn and derision,” “The whole day my abasement is before me and my face is covered with shame. From the call of execration and cursing from the confrontation of the enemy and avenger (Psalms 44:16-17).” “Look upon our poverty/affliction and the distresses of our hearts. Have mercy (Hashem) on us in the land of our captivity, and do not spew Your wrath upon us, for we are Your nation, the children/members of Your covenant.” “Help us, for upon You we are dependent.” “He who saves the pauper from one who is stronger than him, and the pauper and destitute from one who would rob him,” save me and rescue me from my pursuers, save me my Father Who Is In Heaven, save me please/now strong Savior, Redeemer, and Rescuer, save me, and rescue me, and redeem me from all types of haters, and slanderers, and prosecutors, physical and spiritual, have mercy upon us for Your sake, and for the sake of our fathers, and for the sake of all the true tzadikim in whom we always take refuge. He Who Knows Secrets, have mercy have mercy, help, help, deliver us and save us from (being smitten by) sword, from their mouths, and the destitute from the strong. And endow us with power and might from You in the merit of the true tzadikim, and help us, and save us, that we should merit to squelch and put down to the ground all the antagonists who oppose the truth, and we should merit to uproot, and to break, and to nullify all those who denounce and the slander the alienated who come to be drawn truly close to You, who desire to fear Your name. Even though we are not worthy to draw close to You according to our deeds, even still, “Your mercies Hashem are abundant (Psalms 119:156),” Your mercies are extremely abundant, do with us Yourself what You desire, and as You desire do with us, for who can tell You what to do, but who appointed them to be the judge and judiciary, to judge us Heaven forbid, and to prosecute us Heaven forbid, who asked from them to trample on the persecuted Heaven forbid, “For You, he <referring to the Israelites> who You have smitten they pursued, and of the pain of those whom You killed they relate (over) (Psalms 69:27).” “Let me fall please/now by the hand of Hashem because His mercies are abundant, but let me not fall by the hand of man (Chronicles 1:21:13).”

Master of the World, who hears the screaming from the depth on the nethermost scheol (-cavity in hell) and from beneath it, hear my scream, and my groan/wail, and my very bitter sigh, which is very heavy, very deep. Oh Heavens, awaken to my plight and my victimization, what I myself exceedingly prey upon myself, and also others are very, very out to get me, and the battle is upon me from the front and the back. “Return Hashem (from Your wrath already), until when (will You punish me)? And rethink positively of Your servant (Psalms 90:13).” Ahhuh (-expression of woe) Hashem, ahhuh Hashem, “I have outstretched my palms to You (Psalms 88:10),” from the deepest, deepest depth, from the deepest, deepest hiddenness within hiddenness, from thousands and myriads of concealments, I’m in dire straits my Father Who Is In Heaven, it is very oppressive and bitter for me, it is very oppressive and bitter for me, and I don’t have any language in the world with which to explain my words (-what is on my mind) and my pain, “My calling Your heard (-previously), do not hide Your ear (-now) to provide me with relief on account of my prayer/cry (Lamentations 3:56 and Aramaic Targum).” Be gracious to me, and help me that I should merit to tie down the sitra-achra (-evil realm), the realm of “kaitz (-end of) kul (-all) bussar (-flesh),” under the holy speech. And I should merit to extract from their mouths what they devoured, to extract from the sitra-achra (-evil realm) all the evil words and all the defected words that they (-the evil realm) sucked nourishment from (them) through the defection of the speech that I defected (in it) unintentionally (-bishoagaig) and intentionally (-bimaizeed), under duress beyond my control (bi-oaness) and willfully (-birutzoan), and I should merit to rectify all of them with Your abundant mercies, until I merit to extract all the words from the sitra-achra, and to return all of them to their holy roots, until, “all the evil will expire like smoke, and iniquity shuts its mouth,” “because He will close the mouth of all those who speak falsehood (Psalms 63:12).” And You should fill their mouths with gravel, and contort and uproot the mouths and tongues of all the accusers, and slanderers, and denouncers of Your nation Israel, who are kosher and desire to truly fear Your name, and put in their hearts that they should return from their bad ways, and they should truly incline their hearts to the truth, and (that) the truth will be revealed in the world, and there will be a fulfillment of the verse (Isaiah 55:7), “The wicked will leave his way, and the sinful man (desist) his thoughts, and he will return to Hashem, and He will have mercy on him, and (he will return) to our G-d for He will forgive with abundance/largesse.”

And in this vein, You should merit us in Your mercies, our Father, Merciful Father, and You should help us engage in Your holy Torah always, day and night, and I should not lose any night of my nights (to be) without learning and engagement in Torah and devotion, all the days of my life. And You should help me to fend off sleep from my eyes, to learn a great deal of Your holy Torah, and to engage in abundant prayers, and entreaties, and supplications every single night, and every single day, and You should be to my succor always, that no distraction in the world should have the power to cause us to abstain Heaven forbid from the (study of the) Torah and from the devotion, and even when it is difficult for the person Heaven forbid, even when living in poverty and indigence Heaven forbid, we should also merit in Your mercies to engage in Torah and devotion always, and we should never be idle from the words of Torah ever. And You in Your merices, have mercy on us, and see our afflictions/poverty, and our indigence, and our travail, and extend upon us “choot (-a thread) shel (-of) chessed (-kindness),” in Your abundant mercies and in Your great kindnesses, and there will be drawn upon us the light of kindness (which is the aspect of the) morning of Abraham, “and like the morning light there will shine” upon us the light of kindness, and of mercy, and of compassion, and of graciousness. “In/for the day Hashem will command His kindness, and at night sing with me a prayer to the G-d of my life (Psalms 42:9).” And through the light of kindness, the morning of Abraham, that You will extend upon us in Your abundant mercies, through this merit us to squelch and subordinate the realm of “kaitz (-end of) kul (-all) bussar (-flesh),” which is the storm wind, under the holy speech, and there should be a fulfillment of the verse (Psalms 148:8), “The storm wind does His word (-aspect of holy speech).” And there should be an extinction from the world, and from us, and from our border, all the bad words in the world, and we should merit to perfection of holy speech and to rectify defected speech, and we should merit that the holy speech leaves our mouths with song, and praise, and melodious exultation and praising to Hashem Yisburach. And You should merit us from now (on) that there should not leave our mouths any defected speech/word whatsoever, just, all our words shall always only be holy words, of Torah, and prayer, and entreaties, and supplications, and songs, and praises, and thanksgiving to Your great and holy Name, and of fear of Heaven, and of the worship of Hashem Yisburach, in truth, and wholehearted, with holiness, and with great purity, as is Your good desire, “My mouth shall be full of Your praise, the entire day (relating) Your splendor (Psalms 71:8).” “I will bless Hashem all time, always His praise is in my mouth (Psalms 34:2).” “My mouth will relate Your righteousness, the entire day (it will relate) Your salvation (Psalms 71:15).” “I will thank Hashem very much with my mouth, and in public I will sing his praise. For He will stand at the right of the destitute to save him from the judges/judgments of his soul/life (Psalms 109:30-31).”

And in this vein, You should help me in Your abundant mercies, and Your great kindnesses, and Your enormous goodnesses, and Your true graciousnesses, and Your strong compassion, and Your great love for us always, and You should merit me, and save me, that I should merit to raise the speech to its root which is the five fingers of the left hand, which correlate the five source of enunciations of the mouth. And You should merit me in Your mercies to express my words (-what is on my mind) before You always, every day, truthfully and wholeheartedly, and everything that is with (-on) my heart I will converse before You, truthfully, and sincerely (-timeemus), and with very, very much arousal of the heart. And I should merit to speak with great holy passion, to arouse my heart to You, and to speak between myself and my Maker with the flame of the mights, and to be truly aroused to Your devotion. And I should merit to speak with a passionate heart words of truth of the heart, and to see my slightness, and my lowliness, and my enormous and bitter pain, the pain of my sins, and transgressions, and (willful) sins, that I transgressed, and erred, and sinned before You from my youth until today. And You should help me with Your abundant mercies that there should be drawn upon me great and enormous abashment from You, and I should merit to be very, very abashed before You over the huge amount and enormity of my (willful) sins and transgressions, against a Master and Ruler (-“Rav vi’Shaleet”) Essence and Root of all the worlds, Master and Ruler of everything, and above everything, and nothing is above Him. [He who] Fills all worlds (-“mima’lay kul almin”) and surrounds all worlds (-“soavaiv kul almin”), and within all the worlds, and there is no place vacant of Him (-“les a-ssar punnoy meenay”), from Whom all the supernal creatures (-of creation) and all the creatures below, all of them tremble and are frightened from the fear of His great and holy Name blessed He, and all of them perform His will with love, and with fright, and with fear, and terrified, who will not be afraid before You, who will not tremble from Your Name, and in my abundant sins I (willfully) sinned copiously against You blessed You, to the extent that my heart was so occluded (with impurity) (to the extent) that I can’t even be properly abashed before You, I will neither be abashed nor will I know mortification, and/hence now with what will my abundant sins be atoned, and with what will I appease and placate You Hashem my G-d and the G-d of my fathers?

Have mercy and compassion on me, and graciously bestow me daya (-holy realization of knowldedg), understanding, and intellect, from You, in such a fashion that I will merit to be very abashed from Your countenance over the greatness of my (willful) sins against You, and I should merit to speak and express all my words (-that are on my mind) before You with great arousal, with flaming flames of fiery fire, from the depth of truth of the heart, and all my words should be like coals of fire, as it is written (Psalms 39:4), “My heart is hot (-impassioned) within me, when I speak it burn (like) fire, I spoke with my tongue.” And I should merit to truly arouse my heart to Your devotion, and to fear You, and to Your Torah, and to speak always with a passionate heart true words of the heart. And You should merit me to the point of the choicest pinnacle of the truth, that all my words should be the real truth, in the utmost point of the truth that You desire (it), as it is written (Psalms 119:160), “The beginning of Your word(s) is truth and for eternity are all Your righteous statutes.” And I should merit to abound in true words every day with the holy flame of the mights, with a passionate heart, until I truly merit to worship You, and there shall/should be drawn upon me abashment and great fear (of Heaven) at all times before You. And I should merit very soon/quickly to do complete teshuva (-repentance) on all my abundant transgressions, and my infractions, and my (willful) sins, and in Your abundant merices (You should) pardon, and forgive, and atone me for all of them, even though there is no way possible for me to do proper teshuva on all of my enormous sins, because all my days would not be sufficient for me to rectify one transgression or one defect of my abundant sins, even still (You should) have mercy on me in Your mercies, and (You should) merit me that I should merit nevertheless to do complete teshuva (-repentance) according to my ability. And You in Your abundant mercies (You should) accept my teshuva before You with mercy and (good) will, until I merit that You oust, and remove, and banish, and eliminate from me all the spirit of fallacy which possessed me through my bad deeds, and (You should) arouse Your true mercies over me, and trounce the spirit of fallacy which is inside me, and banish it, and distance it, and eliminate it from me with complete nullification. And (You should) merit me to a spirit of wisdom, and understanding, and daas (-realization of knowledge) of holiness, until I merit to be acquainted and know You, truly and wholeheartedly, and through this I will merit that the abashment will actually be apparent on my face, because now my heart and intellect are so impurely occluded through my abundant sins (to the extent) that I have no daas (-realization of knowledge) or intellect even to be really abashed before You as it is befitting for me to be abashed, as You know Hashem my G-d and the G-d of my fathers. Please Hashem, do not do with me in accordance to the evil of my actions. Have pity, and mercy, and compassion on me. And merit me soon/quickly to true, complete repentance before You, until I merit that the holy abashment will be actually apparent on my face, and I will merit to be truly abashed from Your countenance with great shame, in the utmost (shame), as is befitting for me to be abashed from Your countenance Hashem my G-d and the G-d of my fathers, “Master of All Works, Lord of All the Souls,” that You have dealt out to me such benignities at all times and at all hours, and You planned from afar to better my fate, whereas I dealt You the bad, abundant evils, and transgressions, and infractions, and (willful) sins, and defects, numerous, enormous, and awful/hideous, all the time and every day mamash (-literally). “What can I say before You who Dwells In The Heaven, and what can I recount before You who Resides In The Heaven? Behold all the secrets and all the revealed You know.” Rock/Creator of the worlds help me, redeem me, and be gracious to me, save me and bring me salvation, in/with the light of Your countenance give me life and sustain me, merit me that there should be drawn upon me the holiness of the holy Tefilin from their supernal root, and I should merit to hone my intellect in/with the holy Torah always, and I should merit always, every single day, through the donning of the Tefilin, to new moachin (-minds, consciousnesses) and to new recognition of Divine perception and knowledge of Your loftiness blessed He and exalted is Your Name forever and for all eternity, and draw upon me great abashment from Your countenance always, and the fear of You should be on my face – this being the abashment, so that I don’t sin from now and forever. And radiate upon me with the light of Your countenance, and my face will radiate with great holiness through the light of holy abashment which You will extend upon me in Your mercies and great kindnesses, to the extent that all those that see me will be abashed and consternated, that there will fall upon them shame and great fear from my countenance, through the holiness of the light of the Tefilin which You will extend upon me in Your mercies, and they will gain great knowledge, and knew recognition of holiness, and fear (of Heaven), and great abashment, through the holiness of the light of the countenance which You will extend upon me in Your great compassion. And there will be a fulfillment of the verse (Deuteronomy 28:10), “And all the nations of the world will see that the Name of Hashem is called upon you, and they will fear you.”

And save me in Your abundant mercies from the brazenfaced, and help me, and bring me salvation, and rescue me so that I do not have any brazenness of the sitra-achra (-evil realm) whatsoever, and merit me soon/quickly to humble, and to break, and to nullify the brazenness of the body and its desires and its vices. And have mercy on me, and bring me salvation, and save me from all the types of defection of the bris (-covenant, circumcision) in the world, in thought, speech, and action, with vision of the eye, and with hearing of the ear, and with the other senses, with all of them I should merit to be holy and pure with the holiness of the bris (-covenant, circumcision), with great holiness, as is Your true good desire, as is befitting a member of Israel, whom You chose.

For Shabbos

And merit me in Your mercies to receive the Shabbosoas with great holiness and with happiness and great joy (-of contentment and satisfaction – “chedvuh”), with excitement (-geeluh), joyous singing (-reenuh), ebullient/infectious joy (-deetzuh), and good cheer (-chedvuh), love, and brotherhood, and peace (-Shalom), and friendliness, and great peace (-Shalom). And (You should) help me in Your abundant mercies to keep the Shabbos in accordance to its halacha (-Torah law), and save me on the holy Shabbos from any blunder of the 39 principle (-av) miluchoas (-work, constructive activities forbidden on Shabbos and festivals) and their toaldoas (-derivatives, activities similar to the principle 39) and from all the Rabbinical shivoosim (-similar to the word Shabbos, and in the plural, these are additional strictures to enhance the quality), and it should be then in my eyes as if all my work has been done, and I won’t think then about any work, or business, or commerce, or any interests of the weekdays whatsoever. And I should merit to sanctify my speech on the holy Shabbos with extra and enormous holiness, and my speech on Shabbos should not be like my speech of the weekday, and there should not leave my mouth any idle prattle on the holy Shabbos. And (You should) help me, and merit me to sanctify the Shabbos with all types of holiness, and to honor it with all types of honor, and glory, and splendor, with food and beverage and clean attire, and with a nice abode and nice vessels (-dishes, furniture, appliances etc.) of this physical world, and with a beautiful abode and beautiful vessels in my heart (-abode) and limbs (-vessels), and with song, and with praise, and with joyous singing, and hymns, with happiness and great joy, with great and enormous fear and love (of Hashem), and with wondrous and enormous cleaving (-divaikus) to Your great and holy Name. To the extent that I should merit to draw the holiness of the holy Shabbos upon all the six weekdays, until all the six days of work will be pure and holy with the holiness of the holy Shabbos. And I should merit to humble and nullify the putrid pollution of the (primeval) snake from all the 39 miluchoas (-activities forbidden on Shabbos) of the weekdays, until all the 39 miluchoas, and all my business, and all my commerce will be refined in holiness and great purity in the holiness of the holy Shabbos. And (You should) merit me that I remember Shabbos always, and to prepare a nice portion for Shabbos (already) from Sunday, as it is written (Exodus 20:8), “Remember the day of Shabbos to sanctify it,” remember it from Sunday. And I should merit to fulfill the verse which states (Isaiah 58:13-13), “If you withdraw/refrain your foot because of Shabbos, from doing your affairs on My holy day, and you call (-designate) the Shabbos for/an exquisite delight, (to) the holy (day of) Hashem to be honored, and you honor it by not doing your excursions/routines, not looking to your affairs and speaking regularly (“a word/matter”). Then you will have exquisite delight on/from Hashem and He will set you to ride upon the heights of the world, and He will give you to eat the estate/inheritance of Jacob your forefather because the mouth of Hashem has spoken.” Merciful One, He Who Has Compassion on the Poor, Rock of Israel and its Holy One, rise to our aid, and fulfill our wishes mercifully, and merit us to be attached (-divaikus) to You always, at all time, truthfully and with perfect faith, with holiness and with great purity, as is truly Your good desire, and there should be fulfilled in us the verse which states (Deuteronomy 4:4), “And you (-plural) who are clinging (-divaikus) to Hashem your G-d, are all alive today.” Amen, Netzach (-eternally), Selah, Vu-ed (-forever).

Na Nach Nachma Nachman MayUman!

Prayer 52

“My soul yearns for You at night, even my spirit inside of me, I shall seek You out (Isaiah 26:9).” “I remembered at night Your name Hashem and I will guard/adhere to Your Torah (Psalms 119:55).” “On my bed in the nights I sought my soul’s love, I sought Him out but did not find Him (Song of Songs 3:1).” “I remember my melody at night, I converse with my heart, and my spirit quests (Psalms 77:7).” Master of the Universe, Master of the Entire World, Master of Everything, One, Solitary, and Unique; was, is, and will be, You created Your world with Your good will, for Israel Your holy nation, for whom You created all the worlds (all of them), in order to draw the souls of Israel into the world, so that they do Your will in truth and have dominion in the world, in order for them to be able, by means of their good actions to raise and lift all the worlds (all of them), from the apex of “Asseyuh” (-the lowest world of “doing”) till the beginning of the “Atzeeloos” (-highest world of “Emanation”), to raise and to elevated all of them to their supernal root, so that all the worlds (all of them) will be included in Your underlying unity blessed and exalted for ever and all eternity, because “it You before You created the world, and it is You after You created the world.”

So on account of this, may there be will before You Hashem our G-d and the G-d of our fathers, that You have mercy on me, and be to my succor, and merit me to abound in hisbodidus always until I merit through the hisbodidus to nullify myself completely, until my entity is completely nullified, and I will be truly included in Your unity. And merit me in Your abundant mercies, and make available to me a designated place and a designated time for hisbodidus, and I should merit to chose for myself the choice place and the prime time for hisbodidus, which is at night when people are asleep, and on a lone path, that I should merit every single night to do hisbodidus in a designated place, to go on a lone path in a place where people don’t go even in the day, and I will go there and do hisbodidus at night, and express all my words (-what is on my mind) before You, and all that is upon my heart I shall merit to explain and express before You fully verbalized explicitly, until my heart really arouses to You with great passion, and with great and overwhelming crying, with loads of tears, to cry and to confess over my many sins and (willful) transgressions, and to have remorse over them truly and with a complete heart, and to accept upon myself an absolute commitment with a truly complete heart that I will not return again to fallacy, and there will not be in my spirit any deceit whatsoever, “If I have done iniquity I will not continue (Job 34:32, Rashi).” And I should merit to arouse You abundant mercies on me, that You should graciously gift me from Yourself gratuitously, and be to my succor from now (on) always, and guard me and save me with Your mercies from transgressions, and sins, and (willful) wrongdoing, and from all the bad desires. And particularly from defection of the bris (-covenant, circumcision) which is the general precept of the whole entire Torah, save me and guard me always with Your abundant mercies, with Your great mercies, with Your enormous mercies, until I merit through the hisbodidus at night to nullify myself completely, to nullify every single bad trait, and every single bad desire, until I will be completely clean of all the desires and of all the bad traits, and I will merit  to nullify all types of haughtiness, and arrogance, and conceit from myself, until I merit to come to the true real apex of nullification as is Your good will, until I merit to be truly included in Your unity. And through this the entire world will be included with my soul in Your underlying unity (“achdoos hapashoot”), and the “after the creation” will become one and will be included with the “before the creation,” the “contingents of existence (‘efshuray hamitzeyoos’)” with the “imperative of existence (‘cheyoov hamitzeyoos’).” And we will be truly bonded, and united, and included in You always, and we will not separate from You even for a split second, and Your underlying (/simple/encompassing/absolute) unity (‘achdoos hapashoot’) will be revealed in the world, “and everything that has been made will know that You made him, and everything that was created/formed will understand that You created/formed him, and everyone who has a neshama (-soul, also related to the word nesheema - breath) in his nose will say, ‘Hashem, the G-d of Israel is King, and His Kingdom has dominion over everything (-Shmoaneh Esray prayer of the High Holidays).” Help me, help me, be gracious to me, be gracious to me, to abound in hisbodidus and in conversing between me and my Maker at night on a lone path, until I merit to the true apex of nullification, until I will be truly included in You with all worlds (all of them), and we will all return to you truly and with complete heart, “and we will know (/how) to pursue to know Hashem (Hosea 6:3),” by day we will not rest, at night we will not desist, until we merit to find You at all times.

And we should merit to truly fulfill the mitzva of “ooboa <and in Him> seedbuk <you should cling/bond> (Deuteronomy 10:20),” completely, as is Your good desire. Have mercy and compassion on us, have mercy and compassion on us, have mercy and be gracious to us, and merit us to all that we have requested from before You, that we merit to truly nullify ourselves until we are all included in You Hashem our G-d and the G-d of our fathers, because for this alone You created all the worlds (all of them), as You revealed to us through Your true tzadikim. “Return to us Hashem and annul Your anger with us (Psalms 85:5).” Hashem “G-d of Hosts bring us back [and] radiate Your countenance and we will be saved (Psalms 80:8).” “Bring me back and I will return because You are [Hashem] my G-d (Jeremiah 31:17).” “Bring us back Hashem to You and we will return, renew our days as of yore (Lamentations 5:21).” “Yihi-yoo lirutzoan <may they be pleasing – arousing the Divine Will> imray fee <the words of my mouth> vihegyoan leebee <and the expressions of my heart> lifunechuh <before You> Hashem tzooree <my Rock/Maker> vigoa-allee <and my Redeemer> (Psalms 19:15).”

Na Nach Nachma Nachman MayUman!

Prayer 147

“From the straits I called Yu”h (-Hashem) He answered me in/with the expanse of Yu”h (Psalms 118:5).” “In my distress I call Hashem, and to my G-d I cry out, He will hear my call from His chamber, and my crying out before Him will enter His ears (Psalms 18:7).” “I called from my dire straits to Hashem, and He answered me, from the belly of Hell (-Scheol) I called out, You heard my call (Jonah 2:3).” “My calling is to Hashem, I call and He answers me from His holy mountain, sela/eternally (Psalms 3:7).” “My calling is to Hashem, I scream, [my calling is] to Hashem I entreat (Psalms 142:2).” Help me Merciful One so that they are unable to confuse me – the thoughts and the ideas which confuse and impede (me) from praying, and screaming, and arranging my prayer, and my entreaty, and my supplication before You at all times, and let not the pain and the destitution of body, and soul, and money, encumber me Heaven forbid from calling out to You, just, I should merit to call out and scream to You always, be what may be. Because You know how very hard and heavy it is upon me, every day and at all times, to open my mouth before You in prayer, and specifically when I want to express my words (-what is on my mind) before You, to the extent that usually I am unable to open my mouth to speak a word before You due to the abundant stress and heaviness, “Because day and night Your hand weighed down on me, my bodily fluid has regressed in the sweltering heat of the summer, sela (Psalms 32:4 – part of the Tikun Haklali).” And I have no rest from the predators of my soul at all times. And from the utter magnitude of the abundant hardships of the soul and the body, my mouth is shut and mute, and it is extremely difficult and heavy for me to open my mouth before You. And primarily because of infirmity which knocks me down and weakens my confidence at all times, because I know that I myself am at fault for all that is transpiring to me. However, You Merciful One have already made known to us that even still You desire our prayers, and want our entreaties, and listen, and hear, and heed the call of our conversing, and our groaning, and our sighing, as You alerted us many innumerous times, as it is written, “For He has not despised nor abhorred lowliness/calling out of the pauper, and has not hidden His countenance from him, and when he cries out to Him, He listens (Psalms 22:25).” Therefore I hereby cast down my plea before You, and spread out and outstretch my palms opposite Your very extremely abundant and wondrous mercies, and Your graciousness, and Your compassion, that You should be with me at all times and at every hour, and You should help me always so that I do not pay any attention to all types of confusions and ideas of this sort and kind, just, I should merit to strengthen (myself) at all times to begin to express my words (-what is on my mind) before You from the midst of the straits and the distress, and to fulfill, “And my mouth spoke when it was difficult for me (Psalms 66:14).” And I will strain, and tunnel, and push myself to always incline my thoughts and my heart to the truth, and to speak before You all that I can speak, some true word whatever (/however small) it is, even from the midst of the great hardship and the distress. And You with Your abundant mercies and kindnesses, give me expanse in the straits at all times, and augment my mouth [with supplications for all that my heart desires (Rashi)] and fulfill it (-all that I ask for). And help me, and save me, and merit me, and open my mouth with great expanse to express, and to explain, and to converse all my words (-what is on my mind) before You with words of charm/eloquence, and appeasement, and full of entreaty, in such a way that You listen to my prayer and my entreaty, and Your mercies well up/prevail over me at all times, and draw me close to You and to Your Torah and to Your worship in truth.

And merit me to draw close to true tzadikim who the light of the revelation of their novel Torah is drawn from above to below; that above, their Torah is very broad and lofty and below it becomes much more narrow, in order to inoculate it into our hearts and our minds, to each one as it befits him. And distance me from those who upend the just/straight ways, whose Torah are from bottom up, that below they broaden it too much, and above it is very narrow. And similarly with all the prayers, and entreaties, and supplications I should merit to begin from the straits and the confined, and You in Your mercies augment my mouth (-with words), and endow me with Your holy spirit (-ruach hakoadesh) from the Heavens, that I should merit to truly express all my words (-what is on my mind) before You as is Your good desire, and my words should be really sweet before You.

And help me, and save me at all times with all that I need to be saved, in such a way that I merit quickly to be truly as Your good desire. Because You alone know the labors of man and his struggles in this world every day, especially when he wants to approach holiness, to express his words (-what is on his mind) before You Merciful One, that many rise against him, with/his body and soul, physically/materialistically and spiritually, especially someone destitute like myself. “G-d, You know my fallacy, and my transgressions are not restricted from Your knowledge (Psalms 69:6).” “You know my sitting and my standing, from afar You sagaciously befriended me (Psalms 139:2).” “Hashem, how abundant are my tormentors, many[/the greats] rise up against me (Psalms 3:2),” at all times. Have mercy on me, and strengthen and embolden me at all times to have trust in Your abundant kindnesses to call out to You always, be what may be. “Turn to me, and be gracious to me, give Your might to Your servant, and save the son of Your maidservant. Make of (-for) me a favorable sign (-that will make it apparent to everyone that You pardoned me), and my enemies will see (it) and they will be ashamed, because You Hashem helped me, and comforted me (Psalms 86:16-17),” amen and amen.

Prayer 2:11

“Come my Love let us go out to the field, we will lodge in the villages. We will rise early to (go to) the vineyards, we will see if the vines flowered, (if) the blossoms opened, (if) the pomegranates bloomed, there I will give my love to You (Song of Songs 7:12-13).” Master of the Universe, merit me to abound in hisbodidus always, and I should merit to be in the habit of going out every day to the field, between the trees and the grasses and all the seyach (-vegetation; also means: words, conversation) of the field, and there I shall merit to do hisbodidus and to abound in seechu (-words, conversation) which is prayer (Talmud Brachos 20b and elsewhere), between me and my Maker, to converse there all that is with my heart, and all the seyach (-vegetation; also means: words, conversation) of the field, and all the grasses, and the trees, and all the plants, all of them will be aroused to my calling/recital, and they will rise and give their strength and their life into the words of my conversing and my prayer, to the effect that my prayer and conversing will be complete with the apex of perfection through all the seyach (-vegetation, words) of the field, which will all be included with all their strength, and their vitality, and their spirituality to their supernal roots, all of them will be included in my prayer, and through this I will merit to open my heart and to abound in prayer, and entreaties, and in holy conversing before You, abundantly Merciful One, and before You I will pour out all my words (-all that is on my mind), until I merit to pour out my heart like water directly before Your countenance Hashem (-based on Lamentations 2:19), and I will raise/outstretch my palms to You, over my soul and the soul of my infants and children.

Ahuh (-exclamation of woe) Hashem, help help, ahuh Hashem, there is almost no hope Heaven forbid, see “that the hand (of the enemy) intensifies and my strength” is null, just from a distance and from the dust I croak my words to You. Have compassion on someone as myself guilty thousands and myriads of times until today, have compassion on someone alienated as myself, have compassion on someone unworthy of compassion as myself, have compassion on me, have compassion on me, have compassion on me, have compassion on me, have compassion on me, have compassion on me, be gracious to me Hashem with complete gratuitous benevolence/gifting, be gracious to me, be gracious to me, redeem me, redeem me, save me from sins, and iniquities, and (willful) transgressions, save me from the judgment of Hell, save me from the harsh and bitter punishments that I am deserving Heaven forbid according to Your true ordinances, save me from the sword of the Angel of Death, and from cheeboot (-pummeling of) hakever (-the grave, torment exacted on the corpse primarily for indulgence in sensual desires), and from the judgment of Hell, save me from the disgraces, and the embarrassments, and the degradations, so that I will not be embarrassed, and will not be mortified, and will not blunder forever, not in this world and not in the next world. Return me in complete repentance before You. Fix it that I shall go in Your statutes and keep/guard Your laws. “Guard my soul and save me, I shall not be ashamed because I took refuge in/by You (Psalms 25:20).” Perform Your kindnesses wondrously, reveal new kindnesses which are hiddenly cached by You to draw close and to have mercy someone unworthy of mercy such as myself, for Your sake, and for the sake of our forefathers and our sages the true tzadikim, whose holiness is worthy to protect me as well. Save [me], my master the king, “I stretched out my palms to You (Psalms 88:10),” “To You I lifted my eyes, He Who sits/dwells in the Heavens (Psalms 123:1),” “I spread out my hands all day (Isaiah 65:2, similar to the beginning of the coming passage),” “My soul is like the earth, languishing for You, Selah/forever (Psalms 143:6).” Merit me that I should always be as You desire, “My eyes are lifted to the Heavens, Hashem I being extorted, relieve me (alt: be my surety) (Isaiah 38:14),” “Mollify Your servant beneficently (alt: Guarantee Your servants well being), (so that) the evildoers shall not extort me (Psalms 119:122).” “My eyes pine for Your salvation and for Your righteous/vindicating words (Psalms 119:123).” “Until Hashem looks down and observes from Heaven (Lamentations 3:50).” Perhaps He will have pity, perhaps He will have mercy. "And I will always hope and (after the hope pays off) I will add upon all Your praises (Psalms 71:14).” “For Hashem will not reject/forsake forever (Lamentations 3:31).” “It is good to wait silently for the salvation of Hashem (Lamentations 3:26).” “For our souls are bowed/lowered to the dust, our bellies stuck to the earth. Arise to our succor, and redeem us for the sake of Your kindness (Psalms 44:26-27),” amen and amen.

Na Nach Nachma Nachman MayUman!

Prayer 2:22

“A pauper’s prayer when he is overwhelmed, and before Hashem he pours out his words (Psalms 102:1).” Master of the Universe, help me express all my words before You every day and at all times always. And merit me, and save me, that I should merit to abound in conversation between myself and my Creator, until I merit to spend most of the day and the night on this enterprise, all the days of my life. And have mercy on me, and open my mouth every time, and send me true and holy words from Your holy abode, from the Heavens, to supplicate, and to pray, and to beseech from before You for my soul, at all times, with new words. And help me always to abound in supplication, with words of appeasement, and conciliation, and argumentation, and correct justifications, with charming/graceful and pleaful words, in such a way that I will always merit to arouse abundant mercy upon myself that You should save me at all times, to draw me close to You. And I should merit every time to ascend from level to level, to draw close to You at all times with much greater intimacy. Help me and save me Merciful One, may Your innards and compassion well up for me, because You know that (it is) for so long I have yearned intensely to draw close to You, and to return (-repent) from the depth of the sea that I have been trapped in due to my abundant sins. And I want to bore through all the time to do hisbodidus and express my words before You, and I have still not merited to properly express my words before You, and therefore I have still not been saved from the plights of my soul which are very extremely numerous. And there have already passed by years of my life as they have transpired, “And You Hashem, until when?! (Psalms 6:4).” When will You begin to save me [with] a true, complete salvation? For although (Psalms 40:6): “A great deal You have done Hashem My G-d” with me, wonders and awesome things, kindnesses colossal and enormous beyond measure, that You gave me strength until now to hope for Your salvation, and to consort in the auspices of Your holy tzadikim who are truly loyal. However, nevertheless I am still very, very distant from You, and the magnitude of my alienation, and what I am about, and my nature is impossible to explain or fathom, Hashem my G-d, You know. And to abound with words and prayer before You, there isn’t a word on my tongue to properly express my words (-what’s on my mind) before You, as they are in their entirety hidden and cached in my heart, just with Your mercy and Your great salvation, if I merit to find favor in Your eyes from now [on], that You open for me from now [on], from new, the gates of prayer, gates of beseeching and supplication, gates of true rhetoric, gates of hisbodidus, gates of holy talk and words, gates of endearment and pleaful prayer, in such a way that I will merit from now (on) to express my words (-what is on my mind) before You, each time with new words of plea, and ingratiation, and appeasement, in such a way that I will merit to pour out my heart directly before Your countenance Hashem, at all times. Because You know my heart, how much I need to begin to scream, and shout, and pray, and plea before You, and to cry with a bitter soul, and to pour my heart out like water before You, and to prostrate before You pining with all my soul (chaloas hanefesh-) set to mamash (-literally) expire, with true mesiras nefesh (-self-sacrifice, pushing oneself to the very utmost), to beg from before You for my soul/life, over all the transgressions, and sins, and iniquities that I abounded copiously to sin against You, from my inception until today. “What can I say? … I will fret all my years over the bitterness of my soul (Isaiah 38:15).” “Who will give my head water and my eyes (will be) a source of tears, and I will weep day and night (Jeremiah 8:23),” over the bitterness of my soul that I requited to my soul for nothing, for a frivolous desire which is fleeting like a passing shadow, I rebelled against You as I rebelled, and I came to what I came to, and I lost/destroyed what I lost. Woe onto me and on my soul, oy (-woe), what have I done?! “My heart, my heart [goes out/aches] for their corpses, my innards, my innards [go out/ache] for their slain (-“Nachaim” added on Tisha Bi’uv in the Shmoaneh Esray),” Oy vavoy (-woe, alas), what can I say? What can I speak? What justification can I offer? If not for Your mercy and abundant kindness, there would already have been what would have been, may the Merciful One save us, “If not for Your Torah being my engrossing delight, then I would have perished in my afflictions (Psalms 119:92).”

Therefore I have come before You, Merciful One, so that You endow me with new true words from the source of holy words, in such a way that I merit from now (on) to pour out all my words (-what’s on my mind) before You, at all times, with enamoring and truly pleaful words, in such a way that I merit to appease and conciliate You, so that You effectuate now with Your great mercy, so that I will go in Your statutes and adhere to Your commandments, that I shall merit from now (on) to renew my days that transpired in darkness and were “banished to/with/by darkness,” and I will not return again to folly. Help me Merciful One, save me He Who is full of salvations.

And open the eyes of my intellect and cognizance in the way of truth and true timeemoos (-wholeheartedness), that I merit to know well the true and correct way, how to make from the Toaroas (-holy teachings) comely and true prayers, as is Your will and the will of those who fear You, the true tzadikim (-mainly referring to Rabbainu Na Nach Nachma Nachman MayUman), who revealed these Torah novelties in the world, in such a way that they raise great delights before You, until Your mercy will be truly and completely aroused, and You will return me to You in truth. Help me so that I merit to come to their holy intended understanding/intentions of the true tzadikim in every place that I learn from their holy books, and to arrange comely and holy prayers on all the matter that are discussed and alluded to in their holy words in truth, so that I merit to attain them fast. And I should merit to pour out my words (-what’s on my mind) before You by means of each and every Torah which the true tzadikim revealed in the world. And I should merit to go truthfully in Your devotion with all the words of their Torah, so that I should merit to go for some time in the holy way according to one Torah insight, and to supplicate, and to entreat, and to pray, and to converse before You during that entire time, until I merit to reach and attain the devotion which is spoken of in that Torah, to truly fulfill all that is said there, and all my devotion during that entire period and time shall be according to that Torah. And afterwards I should merit to go for a period of time with different Torah insights, until I merit to go with all the Torah insights that they revealed in the world, and to come to their correct intentions/understanding, and to merit to fulfill them completely. And if (-even though) I am very, very far from this right now, in Your eyes there is nothing distant, because from You nothing is beyond reach, behold/certainly “You are Omnipotent and not inadequate for any scheme,” and You make (newsworthy) innovations all the time, which have never in the world been made.

Help me, help me, save me, save me, because I do not have any strength now, just to outstretch my palms for Your mercies, and even this I don’t really merit properly, just from afar I hope and await all the time for Your real complete salvation. And You, what is good in Your eyes do with me, because there is not with me knowledge of anything, how to speak or what to say, and in what way I will merit to attain all that I request from before You. And in what matter I will merit to find every time the true point endemic/applicable to my heart at that time and hour, in such a way that I merit to conduct myself at all times and at all hours in accordance to Your good desire, and to arrange a true prayer and comely conversation before You, and to truly bind myself to the true point endemic/applicable to my heart at this time, in such a way that I merit to return to You, and to be truly in accord with Your good desire always.

Solitary [-Yucheed] Primordial/Preexistent One [-Kadmoan], Strong and Mighty, strengthen me and bolster me in prayer and conversation before You always. “Adona”ye <Hashem> sifusaye <my lips> tiftach <open> oo-fee <and my mouth> yageed <will relate> tiheelusechuh <Your praise> (Psalms 51:17).” “I shall put my hope in G-d, I shall beseech His countenance, I shall ask of Him eloquent language, [so] that in the congregation of the masses I will sing (of) His might, I will express joyous songs on behalf of myself and on behalf/account of His creations. ‘It is for man to caliberate the heart, and/but from Hashem (comes) the eloquence/expression of tongue (Proverbs 16:1).’” Teach me what I should say, give me to understand what I should ask, let me know how to appease/please You, teach me for real the ways of hisbodidus and conversation with You Merciful One, in the vernacular, so that my talking before You should always be just like a person speaks to his friend. Show me which way I will merit to be victorious over You so that You return Your countenance to us and return us in real complete repentance before You. Because You already revealed to us that this is Your desire, that we merit to be victorious over You, as our Sages of blessed memory said (Pesachim 119a), “Sing to Whom one defeats Him and He rejoices.” Rouse Your mercies on Your children, and endow (upon) me and (upon) all who desire, and yearn, and make it their business (-“tunnel”) to express their words (-what is on their minds) before You, holy words which stem from the ten types of song, upon which King David r.i.p. composed the Book of Psalms from the words of his holy conversing that he poured out before You at all times. Because You know that we do not know any way of the ten types of song, just that we are confident in the power and merit of King David r.i.p., and in the power of all the tzadikim (mainly referring to Rabbainu Na Nach Nachma Nachman MayUman) who arranged songs, and praises, and prayers, and conversing before You, until they merited to attain conception of all the ten types of song in the apex of perfection, on their strength alone I rely aw well, I and all those who desire to express their words (-what is on their minds) before You, that we merit as well to speak holy true words as is Your desire which are drawn from the ten types of song, and to pray copiously and to express our words before You always, at all times, truthfully and wholeheartedly. In such a way that we merit to be victorious over You at all times, so that You begin and finish quickly to redeem us with complete redemption that has no exile after it, redemption of the soul, and the body, and the finances, in general and in particular, so that we merit to avoid evil completely and to do what is good in Your eyes always, and to be truly affixed in Your holiness, and to ascend each time from level to level in great holiness in true accordance to Your good will.

“Yihi-yoo (may they be) lirutzoan (desirable) imray fee (the words of my mouth) vihegyoan (and the thoughts/expression of) leebee (my heart) lifunechuh (before You) Adona”i (Hashem) tzooree (my stronghold) vigoa-alee (and my redeemer) (Psalms 19:15).”

apendix

The Way of the Tree of Life

Rabbi Nachman, at least in his early years, told some of his followers to study and follow the guidelines of the Miseelas Yeshurim (Path of the Just) of the Ramchal (Rabbi Moshe Chaim Luzzatto). Elsewhere I have elaborated on many concepts and themes that the Ramchal was a forerunner for Rabbainu. In the beginning of the Miseelas Yeshurim the importance of hisbodidus is made clear, however in a different article – Derech Aitz Chaim – The Way of the Tree of Life, which is printed together with the Miseelas Yeshurim in many publications, there the Ramchal makes it even more abundantly clear, in his inimitable decisive, pristine, and systematical explanatory style. Therefore, as an added bonus, the pertinent excerpt will be presented here BH.

“Being that the Holy One Blessed He desired that man should be the possessor of yetzer (-inclination), that he could equally be won or victorious , there [He] put in them (the) knowledge, just (that it is) sealed like a coal, and so that it can spread out like a flame, and the becheeruh (-choice) is in the hands of the man. And our Sages o.b.m. said (Bava Basra 78b): “‘Therefore the rulers say come (plural) to Cheshboan (name of a city)/accounting (Numbers 21:27),’ ‘The rulers’, these are the rulers over their yetzer (-inclination), ‘Come to Cheshboan/accounting’ come and let us reckon the reckoning of the world!” Because someone who does not rule over his yetzer (-inclination), will never set himself to this, however, those who rule over their yetzer, they will do this matter, and they will teach it to others to do it. Behold, a man is destined to reckon the accounting of his business, the business of temporal life, so why would he not put his heart, even for one hour, also for this, to reckon a reckoning of substance: What is he? And why did he come to the world? Or, what does the King of the kings of kings, the Holy One Blessed He, ask of him? And what will be the end of all his matters? This is the greatest and strongest antidote that one can issue against the yetzer (-inclination), and it is easy, and its enterprise is great, and its fruit (-effects) abundant, that a man should hold up every day for at least one hour, free of all other thoughts, to contemplate just upon this matter which I said/ And he should ask in his heart, “What did the early ones, the forefathers of the world, do, that Hashem so desired them? What did Moshe Rabbainu (-Moses) r.i.p. do? What did David the Messiah/anointed/chosen of Hashem do? And all the greats who were before us? And one should raise (the idea) in his mind, how good it would be for a man to do so all the days of his life as well, and it will be good for him!

“Then he should channel his thoughts to know, in what condition he is to be found and standing, in accordance to the coveted way which these men of historical repute traversed, or not? Or if the power of the yetzer (-inclination) is too much for him, and he can’t contend with one stronger than him?

It is for this the holy Rabbi Shimon son of Yochai was solicitous and screamed like a crane, in his Tikunim (-rectifications – Tikunay Zohar), the tenth Tikun, and this is a quotation: “Veye <woe> upon the people whom the Hole One Blessed He is incarcerated with them in exile, ‘And he (Moses) turned this way and that, and he saw that there was no man (Exodus 2:2)’, just (each) person turned to his way, in their occupation, in their ways.”

“The general matter is, a man who does not think of this will have very great difficulty to achieve completion/perfection, and the man who does contemplate this, is very close to it. And the wise are always engaged in contemplation – they do not divert their minds from this, and therefore they are/will be successful in all their conduct. However, one who does the minimal, should not suffice with less than having a set time to put this to heart, a little or a lot, because then he will be successful in his way, and then he will be smart.

After you know this, that it is your responsibility to ponder and to attentive to this, now I will enlighten and illuminate for you what are the matters upon which you should dwell upon to ponder and to determine.”

Na Nach Nachma Nachman MayUman!

