And he would do all types of simple devotions of service of Hashem without any smarts ("chuchmos") and all with great secrecy/modesty. And immediately upon going outside he would purposely do all types of childish things, all types of silliness and prancing and other similar things (which are called in Yiddish far shaitkait) until it was not possible for it to occur to anyone that he desired the service of Hashem.

And in the beginning in his childhood he was accustomed to taking some large coins and he would change them for small ones, and he would enter the synagogue secretly through the window and so forth and he took with him the book "Shaaray (gates of) Tzion (Zion)," and he would say the lishaim (for the sake of) yichud (unification) for doing a mitzva (a declaration stating one's intent in doing the deed is for the sake Heaven to unify the Divine Names with proper fulfillment of the deed with love and fear and in the name of all of Israel), and he took one small coin and threw it into the "matan (given) bisaiser (in secrecy) (i.e. a charity box designated as such)." And afterwards he made himself as if he was abstracted from it, and afterwards he returned and said the aforementioned lishaim yichud and returned and threw one penny into the "matan bisaiser." And so he returned and did many times until he threw all the pennies into the "matan bisaiser," and upon every single penny he said the aforementioned lishaim yichud. And his intention was in order to do many mitzvos, because his devotion was with absolute simplicity without any smarts ("chuchmos")  whatsoever.

And similarly he would do and serve Hashem Yisburach with all types of absolutely simple devotions without any smarts (-chuchmos) whatsoever, even though in reality he was enormously wise with very extreme superlative wisdom even in his childhood and in his youth as was widely known to all who knew him, even still he did not use any smarts whatsoever in the service of Hashem and was just accustomed to doing all the simple devotions of the world. That is, studying a lot of Torah, good deeds, and abundant prayers and supplications, and very abundant hisbodidus, to speak and express his words before Him blessed He as mentioned above, and so forth. And this was his essential phenomenally great wisdom, because from his utter superlative wisdom he merited immediately to this wisdom that no wisdom whatsoever is necessary for the service of Hashem. Because this is the fundamental greatest wisdom of all (as is explained in our words many times), not to be smart at all in the service of Hashem, just (to conduct) with unfeigned wholeheartedness and simplicity without any smarts (-chuchmos) whatsoever.