And the utter enormity of the dangers that they had on their return is impossible to relate, because they were on this battleship which was full of Ishmaelites, and they were just two Jews alone. And the way of the Ishmaelites, especially men of war, is to grab Jews and sell them in distant places as slaves, and Rabbainu o.b.m. had great fear of this.

And he (Rabbainu) said that he started to think to himself what he would do if they took him to some place on the sea where there is no Jew and they would sell him there, and who would know from this? And he was greatly distressed, how would he be able to fulfill there the Commandments of the Torah? And he began to contemplate this in his mind, until he merited to come to the hasaga (-conception, attainment) that he could serve Hashem Yisburach even when he would be unable Heaven forbid to fulfill the mitzvahs. Because he attained conception of the devotion of the Forefathers of the World that they had before the giving of the Torah, that they fulfilled all the mitzvos even though they did not do the mitzvos in their simple plain form, like our forefather Jacob who fulfilled the mitzva of Tefilin by means of the rods which he peeled, as is known, until he attained conception of how to fulfill all the mitzvos in this way when he would be incapacitated in the place where they would sell him Heaven forbid.

And immediately when he merited to this conception, Hashem Yisburach helped him, and the boat came and arrived on Ohr (-the light, referring to the night when we search for chumetz by candle light) of the fourteenth of Nissan (the day preceding Passover) at a large city that stands on an island in the sea, where there is a prominent large city by the name of Rhodes (-largest of the Dodecanese islands of Greece), and they recognized that this was a city of Jews. And they had great joy, because they could buy here matzos for Passover and wine for the four cups.

However, they did not conceive that the captain and the Ishmaelites would allow them to enter this city, because they saw and understood that the Ishmaelites desired to grab them and kidnap them, and possibly they themselves would sell them as mentioned above.

And in the morning, which was erev (-day preceding) Pesach, the captain traveled with some of the Ishmaelites on the small boat into the city. And they came before him and they requested from him bread to eat, and they spoke to him with gestures, and he replied to them with gestures and told them that there were Jews here and you can buy bread for yourselves. And Hashem Yisburach in His mercies, Whom in His hands are the hearts of kings and aristocrats (Proverbs 21:1), diverted his heart and confused his mind until he let out of his mouth without equanimity, and said that he would take one of them in order to buy bread for them.

And promptly the man who was with Rabbainu traveled with him. And he came to the city, and one of his Ishmaelites followed him to guard him that he should not run away. And his way to the city was also extremely dangerous, because it was time of great war, and they could easily have grabbed him under suspicion that he is one of the spies, because it was recognizable on him that he was not from their country but from a very distant country. However, in the kindnesses of Hashem he passed all the guards of the gates, and they did not do anything to him, until he came to the chief Chacham (-Sefardic title for Rabbi, meaning wise man or sage) and he told him what happened to them, and that they were trapped in a battleship. However, he himself did not know what to relate, because they themselves did not know the intentions of the captain what he wanted to do with them, however, in general he told him that they were just about in captivity Heaven forbid, and they were in danger. And by him this hour felt like lengthy like many hours. And the Chacham desired to hear stories of the war and so forth, and he said time and again: "Do not fear." But he was greatly distressed.

And he had intended to buy matzos and wine, and to return himself to the boat. However, Hashem Yisburach sent to him in his thoughts, being that when they were in the lodgings in Tiberias they heard of Rabbi Tzvi Horker, that his wife was from a Franken (-Sephardic) family and that she has great lineage, and he said that she has a brother in Rhodes, a great sage and tzadik. And this came to his mind, however, he did not know his name, he knew just the name of the wife of the aforementioned Rabbi Tzvi. And promptly and immediately he asked about this Chacham that has a sister in Tiberias. And immediately they sent to the aforementioned Chacham, and the man of Rabbainu o.b.m. came to him. And they already had told the Chacham everything that they had heard from the mouth of the man in the house of the first Chacham mentioned above. And immediately upon his arrival by this Chacham, he said to him: "There is nothing to fear, and stories you will tell me G-d willingly at the Passover Seder."

And he had great bafflement in his heart, because it did not occur to him that the salvation would be so fast so that he would merit to be here for the Seder. And this Chacham said to him: "Know that we already precluded this captain with the boat until he allows you to leave from the boat, and money will be needed to be given to him as much as he wants, and 'it is good to give thanks to Hashem (Psalms 92:2)' who saved you, and did wondrous miracles and wonders with you that you merited to come here, and that the captain's mind would be confused and he would allow you to enter the city. Because this captain is an infamous pirate and he is rooted in his evil, because his lineage is from the five lords of the Philistines, for so he signs his name. And presently there isn't time to hear stories. Come with me to the doctor to give you a haircut in honor of the holiday." And so it was, they took him immediately and they gave him a haircut, and bathed him, and gave him coffee to drink.

And he asked him, "Who is the second person?"

And he said to him, "Have you heard of the Baal Shem Tov?"

And he replied, "Yes," because the books of the gaon the chusid (-pious) the Av Bais Din (-Head justice of the Jewish court) of the holy community of Polnoah (-Rabbi Yaakov Yosef of Polnoah za.tza.l., from the greatest and most important rabbis of his generation. Originally he was an opponent to the Baal Shem Tov, but after, he drew close to him and was from his greatest disciples. He wrote what is reputed to be the first book based on the chasidus of the Baal Shem Tov, Toldos Yaakov Yosef in 5540-1780, and other books. He passed away roughly in the year 5542-1782), were to be found there. And he said that, "he is his great grandson, and he is also the grandson of Rabbi Nachman Hordainker, and of his own right he is a sage as you shall see with your own eyes." And this was doubly joyous for the Chacham, because he said, even to redeem simple people is a great mitzvah and especially that Hashem summoned for him to redeem such a great man, and with such prominent lineage from holy stock. And he hurried himself with some more men to travel to him.

However, in the meantime it happened that some Ishmaelites offended and struck each other, and they quarreled one another until many Ishmaelites were killed between them in the marketplace. And immediately upon hearing this, the aforementioned Chacham with all his men fled to his courtyard, and also the aforementioned man of Rabbainu they took with them as well, and they closed themselves securely shut, and they did not go outside for approximately some hours, and they were not able to travel to him because the day had already declined.

And the Chacham spoke up and said to him: "Know that from my youth I am engaged in Torah study, and devotion of Hashem, and mitzvos, and good deeds, and it can be presumed that I have reward for this, besides for the portion in the future world that I have together with all of Israel. All of this I give to you as collateral, if Heaven forbid I do not endeavor and do my utmost to get you out - let entirely everything be lost. And my intention is not to boast before you, just so that you believe me that I am not abandoning you Heaven forbid, however, there is no time to engage in this today. Therefore, take with you matzos, both shemura matza, and other matzos if you can."
