However, the people of the Land of Israel living in Tsfas (-Safed) and Tiberius, immediately upon hearing that Rabbainu o.b.m. was in Haifa, the greats and the tzadikim who were there sent to request Rabbainu o.b.m. that he should travel to them. And the people of Tiberius came for Yom Kippur to him, and they brought him letters from the greatest tzadikim, that they all are requesting him to come to Tiberius for the holiday of Sukkot, but he paid no attention to all this. And he said to the man that was with him to buy him Esrogim (-citrus fruits - one of the four species taken up on Sukkot), and he went to the Chuchum (-Rabbi of Sephardim) located there and gave him 20 paras (a copper coin), and he went to an Ishmaelite field and brought him 3 very beautiful choice Esrogim.

In the meantime, while he stayed in Haifa, a young Ishmaelite came and sat next to him and spoke to him a great deal of words, and he (Rabbainu) didn't know what he was saying, and so it was by every single meal, in the day and at night, and he (the Ishmaelite) was very friendly to him. And one time he (the Ishmaelite) came to him (armed) with weapons, in great anger, and began to scream and shout at him, and he (Rabbainu) didn't know what he was saying, however, there was a woman there from the province of Volichai (-from the border of Romania), and immediately after the Ishmaelite left, she said to Rabbainu o.b.m., for the sake of Hashem, that he should flee from this house, because this Ishmaelite said, that he o.b.m. should meet him in battle, which is called "fechtin" (- similar to the English word feuding, but should probably be the Russian word for duel: poyedinok , which shares (-anagram) the same consonant letters as fechtin (the Hebrew letter for f and p are the same, and the original Hebrew was printed without distinct vowels) just inverted at the end).

So immediately he o.b.m. fled to the house of the chusid (-pious/hasid) the famous (rabbi), our teacher Rav Zi'aiv of Tcharney-Austria mentioned above, and he hid him in an innermost room, and  afterwards the aforementioned Ishmaelite came again to the house of lodging of Rabbainu o.b.m. and said: "Where is that man?; He should know that I like him very much; I will give him my donkeys and also my horse, so that he can go with the caravan to Tiberias, and from now on he has no longer anything to be afraid of me." And so it was, that Rabbainu o.b.m. came to his lodging, and the Ishmaelite came and did not speak with him at all, just was silent and laughed, and afterwards this Ishmaelite was extremely friendly with him with extra affection. 

And this matter with the Ishmaelite was a great wonder, and Rabbainu o.b.m. said, that he had more suffering from the affection of the Ishmaelite than from his hatred and anger; and according to what was heard from his holy mouth, that there was inherent in this incident that he had with the Ishmaelite, great danger, and it seems that it was heard from his holy mouth that he said, that this Ishmaelite was the Samech Mem (-these are the first and main descriptive letters of the angelic name of Satan) himself, and Baruch Hashem that he was saved from him peacefully with the kindness of Hashem.