Before he traveled to the land of Israel he was in Kaminitz. And his trip to Kaminitz was a great wonder, because suddenly he embarked from his house and he said, that he has a way before him to travel, and he traveled from his house in the way one travels to Mezhbizh. And he said, that he himself doesn't know yet where he's traveling. And he traveled to Mezhbizh, and in Mezhbizh he was notified from Heaven, that he needs to travel to Kaminitz, and he traveled to Kaminitz. And all of his travels were with simplicity, like the way of regular people, without any lordliness and without any publicity, even though he was already famous then in the world, even still he strongly warned the men who traveled with him that they should be careful not to make it known anywhere that he is traveling, and they did not know in any place where he was that he was there, because he traveled inconspicuously like the way of the merchants. And he was in Kaminitz.

And then, at that time, it was not permitted for any Jew to live in Kaminitz or to sleep there in the city, just, all the Jews lived outside the city, and whoever had any business inside the city, would enter into the city in the day, and he was permitted to be there the whole day, and at night all the Jews were forced to leave the city, because it was not permitted for any Jew to sleep there, as is well-known. And Rabbainu o.b.m. entered into the city with one man who was with him then, and he was there until the night, and at night he ordered the man that was with him, that he should leave the city, and he o.b.m. remained there alone inside the city, and he ordered the aforementioned man, that on the day of the morrow he should come into the city and find him there. And he o.b.m. slept there alone inside the city, and no living soul knows what he did there.

And then the next day the aforementioned man entered into the city and found him there, and afterwards he o.b.m. entered with the aforementioned man into many (many) houses, and they made some sort of pretense to enter there, and some of the houses they ordered to give them whiskey or the likes, and they were inside very many houses, and there is no person in the world that knows his intention of what he did there (t.n. except of course for the author of the book Tormented Master who has everything figured out in the most crude way); and afterwards he traveled from there to his house, and afterwards, after Rabbainu o.b.m. slept there, from that time on permission was granted to the people of Kaminitz to live inside the city.