HH

The
Book of

The
Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman

Introduction

“Who
will relate the mighty actions of Hashem, make heard all His praise?”
(Psalms 106). Who can tell over, who can fathom, all the great, and
wondrous, and awesome things done by our master, our teacher, and our
rabbi, light of lights, pure, pristine light, the cached, and hidden,
and concealed light, with the collective entirety of the souls of
Israel, upon whom (/which) are contingent all the worlds. And
especially that which he accomplished and did with his men close to
him who merited to revel in the holy shade of his shadow, and to hear
from his mouth what they heard, matters which Atteek Yoamin
(-Ancient of Days – a Supernal Divine Countenance – Daniel 7:9)
concealed (Pesachim 119a). And particularly, that which he worked and
did with my poor and destitute self, that he erected me from the dust
and the dumps, and sat me down next to him, and with his mercy drew
me even more, close to him, and placed his hand on me (-approbation,
ordination) to receive and to write all his words of Torah, and his
discourses, and his legendary tales. All and everything he merited me
that it should be written by my hand, and he said explicitly (Chuchma
and Beena article 21, and this is a seeming resolution to the query
in Yisroel Saba chapter “Above Nature,” that “a little” goes
on Rabbi Nussun as well as Rabbi Naftoli) that there is no one that
knows from him, except for I (-Rabbi Nussun), a little, and many
additional such expressions.

And
in truth, my soul knows very well what is impossible to tell over
whatsoever, and I already wrote a lot, and I told over orally to my
friends and my students a very great deal, and thank G-d my words
made an impact, with his great power, that the truth entered their
hearts like burning fire, and they were aroused plentifully to Hashem
Yisburach. And many already went on in holiness and purity and passed
away with a good name, from the midst of words of Torah, and prayer,
and perfect faith, “their portion is in life (Psalms 17:14),” and
those who remain for length of days and years, behold they are
strong, with the help of Hashem Yisburach, with the truth and the
faith, like a molten mirror (Job 37:17), so that they never slip
(Proverbs 10:30).

Even
still, I know in my soul, that they, also they, need very much my
information (Shabbos 55b), and they still don't know the light of the
truth of the truth to its truth, completely, properly, as it is
implanted in my soul. And similar to the homily of our Rabbis o.b.m.
(Sanhedrin 68a), a great deal I learned from my rabbis, and I didn't
release from them, just, as a dog which laps from the ocean, and my
students didn't withdraw from me etc.. What can I say? For all these
words of mine involve the knowledge of the pleasant hisnoatzitzus
(-sparkling) of G-dliness in the heart, which is for each one
according to what his heart fathoms (Zohar, Beraishis 103b), and
these themselves are manifestations of his might, these themselves
are manifestations of his awesomeness (Yuma 69b), which he exerted
and toiled in His service Blessed He so much until he merited to what
he merited, and ascended to the place he ascended, (from) which he
drew such deep intellect, deep water advice in the heart of a man
(Proverbs 20:5), deep, deep who can find it (Ecclesiastes 7:24), to
the extent that with his supreme wisdom and his mighty strength he
illuminated with his goodness in the heart of (even) the lowest and
degenerate hisnoatzitzus (-sparkling) of conception of the
Divine, what is absolutely impossible to relate to a friend. And see
that this is a novelty which never was ever, and like it is alluded
in the torah (-holy teaching) of “A field of knives” (Likutay
Moharan 30), see there, that there is a need for a great rabbi, and
wondrous craftsman, and loyal doctor, that can impart conception of
the Divine in the heart of such small, such sick, such alienated
people.

And
behold, if literary means and verbal means are insufficient to tell
over a thousandth of what is in my heart, even still it is impossible
to release nothing, therefore from the day that I merited to draw
close, Hashem Yisburach and he encouraged me to engage in writing the
awesome revelation of his holy Torah, and Hashem Yisburach
strengthened me to always write the matters and conversation that
were by each Torah, because I knew that every single word is a
complete Torah. However in the beginning I was not yet careful to
write all the holy conversations and holy words that left his holy
mouth, just those that had pursuance of words of Torah, or were
related to some Torah (-holy teaching).

Until
after a few years of my drawing close to him, Hashem roused my heart
to begin to also inscribe some of the words and matters that were
heard from his holy mouth then, and little of what was already heard.
Also I inscribed some stories and matters of what transpired to him
and his men, and a little of the stories of his exertion and toils
which he toiled and exerted in the service of Hashem, through which
he merited to what he merited, and the order of his journey to the
Land of Israel, and some stories and events that took place by each
and every Torah and by each Legendary Tale, and how, and through what
his mercy was invoked until he opened his holy mouth and revealed
what he revealed.

And
even though with all of these it is impossible to explain and
illustrate well in writing the nature of the matter as it was when it
took place, even still I did not abstain from writing and inscribing
all that is possible to inscribe, and one who has acute intelligence
will understand from his own intellect a little of the nature of the
matter, all this and perhaps the future generations will merit to
know all the fantastic and wondrous feats which were done for us by
the Master of All, Who conducts every generation with His kindness,
the schemes of His heart (stand) for generation and generation
(Psalms 33:11), Who does novelties all the time, so that His name
will be proclaimed in all the land, so that they will rouse in every
generation to return to Him Blessed He, for He already cleared a
correct way before us by his hand o.b.m., so that from now on whoever
desires to approach the holy, can easily draw close to Him blessed
He, by the ways explained in his holy books. Fortunate is one who
adheres to them, “till in them, till in them, age and wear out in
them, and do not budge from them, for there is no measure better than
them (Ethics of Our Fathers 5:22).”

Behold
all this my eye saw (Job 13:1, 33:29), that it is His will blessed He
to inscribe everything in a book, therefore it has been some time now
that I took it to my heart to write and inscribe every conversation,
and word, and matter, and story that rises in my memory, and these
are the very things written in this book. And I called the name of
this composition by the name “Life of 
 Moa.Ha.Ra.N.
[-acronym: 
 Our Teacher/Guide 

and Leader/Rabbi, Rabbi Nachman], since most of it speaks of his holy
life, of what transpired over him in the holy days of his life, and
the life which he lived in the world. For he was a truly live man who
had no counterpart, and he constantly lived true life, and every time
he lived new life, as was heard from his holy mouth, that one time he
exclaimed, “I lived today life, such life which I have never
lived,” and then he began to reveal a little outline of the torah
(Likutay Moharan 18) “Kartulleesuh – A Chest,” as is
noted in this book, further on in its place (article 8). And
similarly a few times I heard from him o.b.m. wondrous glorification
regarding his life, and regarding the degradation of the life of the
world who don't consider their tachlis (-ultimate purpose),
and also with the life of the world there are innumerable variations,
as is explained a little, further on.

The
general principle is, that the essential life is the true life which
is true wisdom, as it is written (Ecclesiastes 7), “Wisdom give
life to its possessor.” And the main wisdom is to strive and toil
to know and recognize Him Blessed He, for He is life of life (chay
hachayim). And everyone, according to his proximity to this, so
is his life life, and vice versa. And therefore (Brachos 18b) evil
people (even) in their lifetime are called (-considered) dead, and
vice versa, tzaddikim (even) in their death are called (-considered)
alive, for they are always bound in true life, as it is written
(Deuteronomy 4), “And you (plural) who are clinging to Hashem your
G-d, you are all alive today.” And it is for this life that we pray
copiously on Rosh Hashana (-Jewish New Years) and Yom Kippur,
“remember us for life,” “and inscribe for life,” because
aside from this, everything is vain, and there is no life whatsoever.
And regarding this life it says (Deuteronomy 5), “so that you
live,” (Deuteronomy 8), “so that your days are plentiful etc.,”
(Deuteronomy 5:30), “so that you live.” {censored: However life
such as merited by him o.b.m., have still not been experienced by any
person in the world}. Fortunate is he who merits to feel a little of
the sparkling (hisnoatzitzus) of the pleasantness of his life
which he lived, long life, truly good life, as is understood from the
story (-Rabbi Nachman's stories, published under the title: Legendary
Tales, story 13) of the Seven Beggars, which regarding this life,
King David r.i.p. beseeched (Psams 16), “Give me to know the way of
life etc..”

In
this book are written all the stories that we heard from his holy
mouth, also some of the conversation and narrative that we heard from
his holy mouth, because his words are entirely Torah. Also some
incidents that happened and transpired between him and his adherents.
And from all of them the intellectual will understand his utter
greatness and amplitude of his extremely phenomenal holiness, what
the mouth cannot speak nor the heart reckon, and the intellectual at
this time will be quiet and silent, and everyone according to what
their heart fathoms, will understand an infinitesimal bit, less than
a drop of the ocean. And even what we heard and saw, we did not
present here, just a tiny bit alludingly. And because of the utter
strife that they fought (/multiplied) ardently against him, we are
forced to put a restraint to our mouths, so as not to relate his
praise. And the utter magnitude of his holiness and loftiness is very
loftier and superior than our intellect.

However,
even this minute fragment that we merited to know and understand a
little, is impossible to tell over completely because of the great
strife, even though it would be beneficial for the world, I just
inscribed this for the future generations, and for the coming days
which are approaching peacefully, so that it should not be forgotten
from our mouths and the mouths of our progeny. In order that the
future generations know how greatly cherished (the Nation of) Israel
is before Hashem Yisburach, that they merited in the last generations
to such lucid and pure light, the light that is cached (ohr
haganuz) and hidden. Fortunate is the eye that saw him, fortunate
is the ear that heard from his mouth his holy words. And one who
studies his holy books in depth will have a slight understanding of
his utter holiness.

The
words of the writer, the small Nussun son of my master, my father,
our teacher Rav Naftoli Hertz y.t.v. (-may his Bastion protect him
and give him life) of Nemorov.

And
I request of the reader not to be astonished if he finds sometimes in
our words some conversations and stories of Rabbainu o.b.m. that are
written here which appear to be simple things, and sometimes they
seemingly have no explanation whatsoever, and it will be difficult in
his eyes, for what (purpose) were they written. However, in reality,
in all the words, and conversations, and stories that are written
here, there are inherent matters behind all of them, and whoever
merited to stand before him and hear from his mouth the matters and
the conversations, it would misnoatzaitz (-glimmer) for him a
little, and he would see and understand a little that they are very
supernal and lofty, and he would be aroused to Hashem Yisburach by
each and every word that left his mouth with wondrous holiness and
purity. And because of this I wasn't able to hold back from writing
and jotting down a few stories and words for a remembrance, and even
though there are in them a few words that the reader will not
understand the gist of them, even still (Yevumos 30a regarding a
mishna that is seemingly redundant) the mishna does not move from
it's place.

And
whoever desires the truth can find in most of the words, wondrous
matters, and many, many wondrous awakenings for the service of Hashem
Yisburach, and many aitzoas (-directives, advice, remedies),
and much succor, which will strengthen a person immensely not to
despair of himself in any way, and so forth, because (Deuteronomy
32), “It is not a vain matter for you,” and if it is vain, (that
is only) from you (Jerusalem Talmud Peah), for even the simple words
of Rabbainu o.b.m., the great and the holy, they introduce great
light, and they have great power to arouse the whole world to His
service blessed He, which was the concern Rabbainu o.b.m. was
entirely preoccupied with all the days of his holy life. It was also
heard from his holy mouth, that even his simple words need to be
written, because in each and every statement of his, there are (in
them) extremely deep intentions, and they are great generalizations
(-principles that incorporate all, and are all encompassing), and
every person can extract from them wondrous aitzoas (-advice,
remedies) and upright practices for His service blessed His name.

[The
transcriber says, regarding the hiddenness of the great and wondrous
light of the Ad.m.ur. (-hasidic master) o.b.m., which a novelty like
him has yet to be, even in the earlier generations, as we heard from
his holy mouth, that he said so explicitly, and in the end he became
so hidden, in the utmost 

hiddenness
and concealment to the extent that most of the world do not merit to
come upon his holy grave, which is their entire eternal
rectification, a hint to this can be found in his holy words, that he
said that his entire occupation is Rosh Hashana, and regarding Rosh
Hashana it is written (Psalms 81:4), “in the designated time

 for the day of our festival,”
as our Sages o.b.m. explicated (Rosh Hashana 8a; backesseh can
also mean, in the concealed, because Rosh Hashana occurs on the first
of the lunar month when the moon is concealed), and therefore his
great wondrous light is hidden and concealed so very much as well, to
the extent that all the people of the world do not merit to come to
his grave and pray there, and like our Sages o.b.m. said (Sota 14a,
this was censored from some editions of the Talmud), why is the grave
of Moshe hidden from the world etc., it comes out that (Deuteronomy
34:6), “no man knew the grave of Moshe,” so that they wouldn't be
able to come upon his grave, to pray there, and so too the grave of
the Ad.m.u.r. o.b.m. is hidden as well from the world by means of the
great contention, even though the place of his burial is known, so
that they also will not be able to come there to pray there. May
there be [Divine] Will that the truth will be revealed in the world,
and his holiness will be made famous in the world, and then the
redemption will come, very soon in our days, amen].

נַ
נַחְ נַחְמָ נַחְמָן מאומן