It should be noted that the Breslov classic: The Life of Our
Leader Rabbi Nachman, is actually divided into at least two parts, and the
second part is titled: Shivchay Moharan – The Praises of Our Leader Rabbi
Nachman.

 

HH

 

The
Book of

 

The
Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman

 

 

Title
Page

 

He is Rabbainu Hakadosh (our
holy Rabbi), the great man of the giants, holy menorah, light of lights, Rabbi
of all of Israel, gushing brook source of wisdom (Nachal Noavaya Mikor
Chuchman -acronym: NaChMaN), man of G-d, our teacher, the rav, Rabbi
Nachman za.tza.va.ka.l. (-memory of the tzaddik and the holy for a
blessing), author of the books Likutay Moharan (two volumes), and the book The
Attributes (-Sefer Hamidos – Character), and the Legendary Tales, and additional
other compilations which are in manuscript, grandson of the supernal holy etc.
Rabbi Nachman of Hurridenker za.tza.l., great grandson of the G-dly Tana
(-superlative sage), holy of Israel, our teacher, the rav, Rabbi Israel Baal
Shem Tov za.tza.va.ka.l., may their merit protect us and all of Israel,
amen.

 

In this book will be related a
little of his holy life, of his utter toil and exertion in the service of
Hashem Yisburach with supremely powerful messeeras nefesh (-self
sacrifice), from his childhood days until his passing, until he merited to live
true life, life which is truly called life. And it will relate a little of what
transpired over him in his holy life, and a little of his holy words which were
heard from his holy mouth, and the times that passed over him, as your eyes
will see straight out.

 

 

Na
Nach Nachma Nachman MeUman

 

 

 

 

Introduction

 

“Who will relate the mighty
actions of Hashem, make heard all His praise?” (Psalms 106). Who can tell over,
who can fathom, all the great, and wondrous, and awesome things done by our
master, our teacher, and our rabbi, light of lights, pure, pristine light, the
cached, and hidden, and concealed light, with the collective entirety of the
souls of Israel, upon whom (/which) are contingent all the worlds. And
especially that which he accomplished and did with his men close to him who
merited to revel in the holy shade of his shadow, and to hear from his mouth
what they heard, matters which Atteek Yoamin (-Ancient of Days – a
Supernal Divine Countenance – Daniel 7:9) concealed (Pesachim 119a). And
particularly, that which he worked and did with my poor and destitute self,
that he erected me from the dust and the dumps, and sat me down next to him,
and with his mercy drew me even more, close to him, and placed his hand on me
(-approbation, ordination) to receive and to write all his words of Torah, and
his discourses, and his legendary tales. All and everything he merited me that
it should be written by my hand, and he said explicitly (Chuchma and Beena
article 21, and this is a seeming resolution to the query in Yisroel Saba
chapter “Above Nature,” that “a little” goes on Rabbi Nussun as well as Rabbi
Naftoli) that there is no one that knows from him, except for I (-Rabbi
Nussun), a little, and many additional such expressions.

 

And in truth, my soul knows
very well what is impossible to tell over whatsoever, and I already wrote a
lot, and I told over orally to my friends and my students a very great deal,
and thank G-d my words made an impact, with his great power, that the truth
entered their hearts like burning fire, and they were aroused plentifully to
Hashem Yisburach. And many already went on in holiness and purity and passed
away with a good name, from the midst of words of Torah, and prayer, and perfect
faith, “their portion is in life (Psalms 17:14),” and those who remain for
length of days and years, behold they are strong, with the help of Hashem
Yisburach, with the truth and the faith, like a molten mirror (Job 37:17), so
that they never slip (Proverbs 10:30).

 

Even still, I know in my soul,
that they, also they, need very much my information (Shabbos 55b), and they
still don't know the light of the truth of the truth to its truth, completely,
properly, as it is implanted in my soul. And similar to the homily of our
Rabbis o.b.m. (Sanhedrin 68a), a great deal I learned from my rabbis, and I
didn't release from them, just, as a dog which laps from the ocean, and my
students didn't withdraw from me etc.. What can I say? For all these words of
mine involve the knowledge of the pleasant hisnoatzitzus (-sparkling) of
G-dliness in the heart, which is for each one according to what his heart
fathoms (Zohar, Beraishis 103b), and these themselves are manifestations of his
might, these themselves are manifestations of his awesomeness (Yuma 69b), which
he exerted and toiled in His service Blessed He so much until he merited to
what he merited, and ascended to the place he ascended, (from) which he drew
such deep intellect, deep water advice in the heart of a man (Proverbs 20:5),
deep, deep who can find it (Ecclesiastes 7:24), to the extent that with his
supreme wisdom and his mighty strength he illuminated with his goodness in the
heart of (even) the lowest and degenerate hisnoatzitzus (-sparkling) of
conception of the Divine, what is absolutely impossible to relate to a friend.
And see that this is a novelty which never was ever, and like it is alluded in
the torah (-holy teaching) of “A field of knives” (Likutay Moharan 30), see
there, that there is a need for a great rabbi, and wondrous craftsman, and
loyal doctor, that can impart conception of the Divine in the heart of such
small, such sick, such alienated people.

 

And behold, if literary means
and verbal means are insufficient to tell over a thousandth of what is in my
heart, even still it is impossible to release nothing, therefore from the day
that I merited to draw close, Hashem Yisburach and he encouraged me to engage
in writing the awesome revelation of his holy Torah, and Hashem Yisburach
strengthened me to always write the matters and conversation that were by each
Torah, because I knew that every single word is a complete Torah. However in
the beginning I was not yet careful to write all the holy conversations and
holy words that left his holy mouth, just those that had pursuance of words of
Torah, or were related to some Torah (-holy teaching).

 

Until after a few years of my
drawing close to him, Hashem roused my heart to begin to also inscribe some of
the words and matters that were heard from his holy mouth then, and little of
what was already heard. Also I inscribed some stories and matters of what
transpired to him and his men, and a little of the stories of his exertion and
toils which he toiled and exerted in the service of Hashem, through which he merited
to what he merited, and the order of his journey to the Land of Israel, and
some stories and events that took place by each and every Torah and by each
Legendary Tale, and how, and through what his mercy was invoked until he opened
his holy mouth and revealed what he revealed.

 

And even though with all of
these it is impossible to explain and illustrate well in writing the nature of
the matter as it was when it took place, even still I did not abstain from
writing and inscribing all that is possible to inscribe, and one who has acute
intelligence will understand from his own intellect a little of the nature of
the matter, all this and perhaps the future generations will merit to know all
the fantastic and wondrous feats which were done for us by the Master of All,
Who conducts every generation with His kindness, the schemes of His heart
(stand) for generation and generation (Psalms 33:11), Who does novelties all
the time, so that His name will be proclaimed in all the land, so that they
will rouse in every generation to return to Him Blessed He, for He already
cleared a correct way before us by his hand o.b.m., so that from now on whoever
desires to approach the holy, can easily draw close to Him blessed He, by the
ways explained in his holy books. Fortunate is one who adheres to them, “till
in them, till in them, age and wear out in them, and do not budge from them,
for there is no measure better than them (Ethics of Our Fathers 5:22).”

 

Behold all this my eye saw (Job
13:1, 33:29), that it is His will blessed He to inscribe everything in a book,
therefore it has been some time now that I took it to my heart to write and
inscribe every conversation, and word, and matter, and story that rises in my
memory, and these are the very things written in this book. And I called the
name of this composition by the name “Life of 
 Moa.Ha.Ra.N.
[-acronym: 
 Our Teacher/Guide 

and Leader/Rabbi, Rabbi Nachman], since most of it speaks of his holy life, of
what transpired over him in the holy days of his life, and the life which he
lived in the world. For he was a truly live man who had no counterpart, and he
constantly lived true life, and every time he lived new life, as was heard from
his holy mouth, that one time he exclaimed, “I lived today life, such life
which I have never lived,” and then he began to reveal a little outline of the
torah (Likutay Moharan 18) “Kartulleesuh – A Chest,” as is noted in this
book, further on in its place (article 8). And similarly a few times I heard
from him o.b.m. wondrous glorification regarding his life, and regarding the
degradation of the life of the world who don't consider their tachlis
(-ultimate purpose), and also with the life of the world there are innumerable
variations, as is explained a little, further on.

 

The general principle is, that
the essential life is the true life which is true wisdom, as it is written
(Ecclesiastes 7), “Wisdom give life to its possessor.” And the main wisdom is
to strive and toil to know and recognize Him Blessed He, for He is life of life
(chay hachayim). And everyone, according to his proximity to this, so is
his life life, and vice versa. And therefore (Brachos 18b) evil people (even)
in their lifetime are called (-considered) dead, and vice versa, tzaddikim
(even) in their death are called (-considered) alive, for they are always bound
in true life, as it is written (Deuteronomy 4), “And you (plural) who are
clinging to Hashem your G-d, you are all alive today.” And it is for this life
that we pray copiously on Rosh Hashana (-Jewish New Years) and Yom Kippur,
“remember us for life,” “and inscribe for life,” because aside from this,
everything is vain, and there is no life whatsoever. And regarding this life it
says (Deuteronomy 5), “so that you live,” (Deuteronomy 8), “so that your days
are plentiful etc.,” (Deuteronomy 5:30), “so that you live.” {censored: However
life such as merited by him o.b.m., have still not been experienced by any
person in the world}. Fortunate is he who merits to feel a little of the sparkling
(hisnoatzitzus) of the pleasantness of his life which he lived, long
life, truly good life, as is understood from the story (-Rabbi Nachman's
stories, published under the title: Legendary Tales, story 13) of the Seven
Beggars, which regarding this life, King David r.i.p. beseeched (Psams 16),
“Give me to know the way of life etc..”

 

In this book are written all
the stories that we heard from his holy mouth, also some of the conversation
and narrative that we heard from his holy mouth, because his words are entirely
Torah. Also some incidents that happened and transpired between him and his
adherents. And from all of them the intellectual will understand his utter
greatness and amplitude of his extremely phenomenal holiness, what the mouth
cannot speak nor the heart reckon, and the intellectual at this time will be
quiet and silent, and everyone according to what their heart fathoms, will
understand an infinitesimal bit, less than a drop of the ocean. And even what
we heard and saw, we did not present here, just a tiny bit alludingly. And
because of the utter strife that they fought (/multiplied) ardently against
him, we are forced to put a restraint to our mouths, so as not to relate his
praise. And the utter magnitude of his holiness and loftiness is very loftier
and superior than our intellect.

 

However, even this minute
fragment that we merited to know and understand a little, is impossible to tell
over completely because of the great strife, even though it would be beneficial
for the world, I just inscribed this for the future generations, and for the
coming days which are approaching peacefully, so that it should not be
forgotten from our mouths and the mouths of our progeny. In order that the
future generations know how greatly cherished (the Nation of) Israel is before
Hashem Yisburach, that they merited in the last generations to such lucid and
pure light, the light that is cached (ohr haganuz) and hidden. Fortunate
is the eye that saw him, fortunate is the ear that heard from his mouth his
holy words. And one who studies his holy books in depth will have a slight
understanding of his utter holiness.

 

The words of the writer, the
small Nussun son of my master, my father, our teacher Rav Naftoli Hertz y.t.v.
(-may his Bastion protect him and give him life) of Nemorov.

 

And I request of the reader not
to be astonished if he finds sometimes in our words some conversations and
stories of Rabbainu o.b.m. that are written here which appear to be simple
things, and sometimes they seemingly have no explanation whatsoever, and it
will be difficult in his eyes, for what (purpose) were they written. However,
in reality, in all the words, and conversations, and stories that are written
here, there are inherent matters behind all of them, and whoever merited to
stand before him and hear from his mouth the matters and the conversations, it
would misnoatzaitz (-glimmer) for him a little, and he would see and
understand a little that they are very supernal and lofty, and he would be
aroused to Hashem Yisburach by each and every word that left his mouth with
wondrous holiness and purity. And because of this I wasn't able to hold back
from writing and jotting down a few stories and words for a remembrance, and
even though there are in them a few words that the reader will not understand
the gist of them, even still (Yevumos 30a regarding a mishna that is seemingly
redundant) the mishna does not move from it's place.

 

And whoever desires the truth
can find in most of the words, wondrous matters, and many, many wondrous
awakenings for the service of Hashem Yisburach, and many aitzoas
(-directives, advice, remedies), and much succor, which will strengthen a
person immensely not to despair of himself in any way, and so forth, because
(Deuteronomy 32), “It is not a vain matter for you,” and if it is vain, (that
is only) from you (Jerusalem Talmud Peah), for even the simple words of
Rabbainu o.b.m., the great and the holy, they introduce great light, and they
have great power to arouse the whole world to His service blessed He, which was
the concern Rabbainu o.b.m. was entirely preoccupied with all the days of his
holy life. It was also heard from his holy mouth, that even his simple words
need to be written, because in each and every statement of his, there are (in
them) extremely deep intentions, and they are great generalizations
(-principles that incorporate all, and are all encompassing), and every person
can extract from them wondrous aitzoas (-advice, remedies) and upright
practices for His service blessed His name.

 

[The transcriber says,
regarding the hiddenness of the great and wondrous light of the Ad.m.ur.
(-hasidic master) o.b.m., which a novelty like him has yet to be, even in the
earlier generations, as we heard from his holy mouth, that he said so
explicitly, and in the end he became so hidden, in the utmost 

hiddenness and concealment to
the extent that most of the world do not merit to come upon his holy grave,
which is their entire eternal rectification, a hint to this can be found in his
holy words, that he said that his entire occupation is Rosh Hashana, and
regarding Rosh Hashana it is written (Psalms 81:4), “in the designated time

 for the day of our festival,” as our Sages
o.b.m. explicated (Rosh Hashana 8a; backesseh can also mean, in the concealed,
because Rosh Hashana occurs on the first of the lunar month when the moon is
concealed), and therefore his great wondrous light is hidden and concealed so
very much as well, to the extent that all the people of the world do not merit
to come to his grave and pray there, and like our Sages o.b.m. said (Sota 14a,
this was censored from some editions of the Talmud), why is the grave of Moshe
hidden from the world etc., it comes out that (Deuteronomy 34:6), “no man knew
the grave of Moshe,” so that they wouldn't be able to come upon his grave, to
pray there, and so too the grave of the Ad.m.u.r. o.b.m. is hidden as well from
the world by means of the great contention, even though the place of his burial
is known, so that they also will not be able to come there to pray there. May
there be [Divine] Will that the truth will be revealed in the world, and his
holiness will be made famous in the world, and then the redemption will come,
very soon in our days, amen].

 

נַ נַחְ נַחְמָ נַחְמָן מאומן 

 

 

 

 

HH

 

The
Book of

 

The
Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman

 

 

Words
That Pertain to the Toaroas (-holy teachings)

 

Words,
and stories, and events that were by each Torah and Tale

 

1.

 

(1.) The Torah “With Trumpets”
(Likutay Moharan, Torah 5) he said on Rosh Hashana here in Breslov in the year
(5)563 [27-28 September, 1802], and Rosh Hashana occurred then on Monday and
Tuesday. And it was the first Rosh Hashana of his residence here, and of my
drawing close to him.

 

And it was then when it was heard in
the world the edicts that they wanted to decree in the world which were issued
in our days, due to our numerous sins, that is, to conscript the Children of
Israel into the army, may the Merciful One save us from now on, because these
edicts began to develop in the days of the sovereignty of Poland before the
C.eer.a. [Czar may his splendor rise] of Russia conquered our country, and
afterwards, at the beginning of his domination over our country the matter was
silent for a bit, and afterwards it returned and arose and it was heard in the
world that they want to decree a batch of decrees which are called poonkiteen.

 

It was then that Rabbainu o.b.m.
said the Torah ( “With trumpets (bichatzroatzoas)” and it begins: “For a
person needs to say, 'the entire world was not created, only for me' etc. and
to fill the deficiency of the world, and to pray for them to Hashem Yisburach
etc. that is before the edict (gizar din) etc.” see there, and this
alludes to the aforementioned edicts.

 

(And see the book Parpiru'oas
Lichuchma where it is written: “And I heard from my father o.b.m. that Rabbainu
o.b.m. hinted then that it was already after the edict. Yet even still Rabbainu
za.tza.l. engaged copiously throughout the year to mitigate (lit. sweeten) the
judgment, until through this (-the methods revealed in this holy teaching) he
accomplished with his prayer that the matter was supressed, and the edict did
not go into effect until sixteen years after his passing. And there is a great
deal to tell over about this, and it will be explicated elsewhere (below
article 6), see there.

 

And our fellow elder votaries told
over that they heard then from Rabbainu o.b.m. who said in these words: “Ich

 hub 
 dus up dishtuempt oyf 

etlicheh uen tzvantzig 
 yuhr 
.” And so it
was precisely, because from the year of the delivery of the aforementioned
Torah until the year the edict went into effect in the end of the year (5)587
there is a sum of twenty five years.)

 

 

 

2.

 

(2.) The Torah (Likutay Moharan,
Torah 6) “Call Joshua,” he said on Shabbos Teshuva (-”the Sabbath of
Repentence” between Rosh Hashana and Yom Kippur) which was after the
aforementioned Rosh Hashana.

 

And he mentioned then, close to the
beginning of the Torah, the verse (Ezekiel 1), “And on the throne an image with
the appearance of a man upon it from above.” (And afterwards, in his holy
handwriting, this verse is not mentioned until close to the end, as is
explicated in the book, see there). At that time he grasped, with both his
hands, the two arm rests of the chair he was sitting on, and he was swaying
with the chair, and he said with trepidation, and fear, and with extremely
formidable meseeras nefesh (self sacrifice) these words: “When 
 one
sits 
 on a chair 
, then 
 he
is a man 
,” and the words are extremely abstruse (the
transcriber says: see Zohar, Tazreyah page 48).

 

And afterwards he finished this
entire awesome Torah (-holy teaching) which is printed in the book. And when he
said the Torah he did not speak at all of the matter of the kavanos
(-Lurian kabalistic intentions) of Elul (the Jewish month devoted to
repentance, which precedes the New Years), just afterwards, when he finished
saying this Torah, after he prayed Arvis (the night prayer) and made havdala
(the ritual which separates the end of Sabbath from the beginning of the new
week), afterwards he returned and spoke of this Torah, as was his practice
always, and he then spoke up and said to the dignified men and elders that were
sitting by him then, who prayed from the siddur (prayerbook) of the
Arizal, “Tell me how in the aforementioned Torah are alluded all the kavanos
of Elul,” and they were silent and did not answer, because in reality it
is impossible in any way to understand by themselves how the secret of the kavanos
of Elul are alluded to in the aforementioned Torah.

 

And he commanded to bring before him
the siddur of the Arizal, and he opened it, and he displayed before them
the kavanos of Elul. And afterwards he opened his holy and awesome mouth and
began to reveal wonders, how all the kavanos of Elul are alluded there in an
extremely wondrous and awesome way, as this explicated in the book, but it is
impossible to describe in writing the depth of heart, all the pleasantness and
wonders of the Temim Dayim (-Perfect Knower – Job 37:16) that I
felt then, when I merited to hear all of this.

 

He also spoke after Sabbath of the
aforementioned Torah which speaks there of Moses and Joshua and the Ohel
Moa'ed (“Meeting Tent” - the Tabernacle) which are the aspects of the upper
point (Moses), lower point (Joshua), and vuv (- the Hebrew letter vuv
which is a vertical line, and in the letter Aleph it runs diagonally down from
left to right between the two points mentioned above, and corresponds to the Ohel
Moa'ed). And then he said to me these words, “that in every place that a
Rabbi (-teacher) and a student get together, this aspect is made, the aspect of
Moses, and Joshua, and the Ohel Moa'ed.” 

 

And behold, all this was at the
beginning of my drawing close to him, and at that time I still did not merit to
write up before him the large Toaroas (-holy teachings), just the short homilies
I wrote by myself, not before him, and I was yearning for a long time to
receive this Torah by him, in his holy handwriting, and I didn't merit this
until after Purim (March 8, 1803), which I was by him then in Medivedivikeh.
And then I sat before him and I copied this Torah before him, and from his
mouth he read to me from his holy handwritten book, and I wrote (it all down)
on paper.

 

And some time shortly thereafter, at
night, I stood before him when he had already sat on his bed and wanted to
sleep, and I spoke with him then at length, and then he revealed to me the
three mitzvos that (the Children of) Israel were commanded to do upon entering
the Land, which appertains to this, as it is printed in its place there, see
there. And he concluded then and said, that all these three mitzvos are the
aspect of repentance, as is printed there. And then I asked him how these three
mitzvos are the aspect of repentance, and he replied and said, “dus

 zug doo 
 shoyn 
,” and with this I then went from
his presence o.b.m., and immediately I began to contemplated this, and
immediately on my way from my (t.n. probably should be: his) house to my
lodgings, Hashem Yisburach availed me with comely novelties for this, and when
I came to my lodgings I found, with the help of Hashem Yisburach, writing
utensils, and right away I wrote what Hashem and graced me for this, and this
was the beginning of my training (/initiation) to develop novelties from his
holy Torah, that he trained (/initiated) me with his mercy and wondrous ways.
And the next day I brought before him what I had written, and it was good in
his eyes, and he laughed from happiness, and he spoke up and said, “You 

can 
 learn 
, if 
 you 

will be 
 diligent 
,” but even still, afterwards I
was forced to cease from developing novelties until I would learn a lot of poasaik
(-arbitrator of halacha- Jewish law), and afterwards books of kabbalah etc.,
until afterwards he commanded me to come up with novelties, and afterwards he
commanded me to write, as all this will be explicated elsewhere (below article
435).

 

 

 

3

(3.) Before he said the Torah
“Mishpatim (judgments) Emunah (faith)” (Likutay Moharan, Torah 7), I heard from
him o.b.m. the Torah “Tzoahar (a light; window or radiant stone) make for the
ark (Genesis 6; Torah 112),” and I wrote what heard, as is printed in that
Torah. However, afterwards he said the Torah “Tihoamoas (the depth)
yichasyoomoo (will cover them)” (Exodus 15; Torah 9), and the aforementioned
Torah “Tzoahar” is included there. And the Torah “Tihoamoas yichasyoomoo (The
depth will cover them)” was said on Sabbath Sheera (singing – the Sabbath on
which the Torah portion of Bishalach is read, which contains the “Uz Yusheer” -
the song the Jews sang to Hashem after the miracle of the splitting of the sea)
5563 (13th of Shevat; Feb. 5, 1803), on (his) travels, and
afterwards he began to say the aforementioned Torah “Mishpatim (judgments),”and
he said it piece by piece.

 

And at that time, he told over that
the Baal Shem Tov o.b.m. was by him, and told him that when one maculates the
Land of Israel he falls into exile, and an indication (to this): “From there
shepherds the stone 
 of Israel (Genesis 49).” And he asked us to tell him an
interpretation on that vision, and we did not know anything to answer him.
Afterwards I showed him the Torah “Tzoahar (a light) make for the ark (Torah
112),” which I had written, as mentioned above, and he saw and looked at it,
(and) afterwards he said, “from my students (I have learned) more than all of
them (-teachers and friends; taanis 7a),” (in other words, that now he
understands through me the interpretation of the aforementioned vision of the
Baal Shem Tov o.b.m.), because now I know the matter well.

 

And afterwards he finished the Torah
“Mishpatim (judgments; Torah 7).” And there it speaks of faith and the Land of
Israel, that when one vitiates the Land of Israel, the faith, one descends into
the exile of Egypt. And I asked him if this was relevant to the aforementioned
vision, (and) he answered that the matter of the vision he already concluded
earlier to conceive (the matter) completely. And afterwards I received from him
the Torah “The Depth Covered Them (Ti'hoamoas Yichasyoomoo; Torah 9),” and
there as well, the Torah “Tzohar (light; Torah 112)” is included, and there as
well, at the end, is explicated that the violation of the Land of Israel causes
descent into exile, and there, at the end, is an explanation of the verse “from
there shepherds the stone 
 of Israel.” And now it is
possible to slightly understand the meaning of the aforementioned vision.

 

 

 

4

(4.) When he said the Torah “I saw a
golden menorah (Zecharia 4; Torah 8),” on the Sabbath of Chanuka 5563 (30
Kislev; Dec. 25, 1802), and there it speaks of how to topple and put down the
wicked, the aspect of (Psalms 147:6) “(He) puts down the wicked to the ground,”
see there, and then at that time he felled and put down a certain notorious
wicked person who was in Nemerov, from whom our fellow votaries suffered, and
they had told (this) before him o.b.m.. And after Chanuka, after he said the
aforementioned Torah on the Sabbath of Chanuka, the aforementioned wicked man
had a great downfall.

 

Also then, he said a quip, “When you
travel and they will ask you, 'What did you accomplish?' Say, 'We accomplished ruach
etc. 
,' and this in fact is the reality, that we accomplished ruach
chaim 
 which we received from
him, to fill all deficiencies, as is explicated in the aforementioned Torah.
Also, after saying the Torah, he danced a lot, because that year he danced a
lot, on a few occassions.

 

 

 

5

(5.) The toaroas (holy teachings)
which were said on the homilies of Rabba bar bar Chunu (Bava Basra 73; Likutay
Mohara 1-15), Rabbainu o.b.m. said, that he said them in the name of their
sayer (-author), that is in the name of Rabba bar bar Chunu himself. Also when
he began to reveal Toaroas (-holy teachings) on the homilies of Rabba bar bar
Chunu (then) he told over that Rabba bar bar Chunu came to him, and greeted
him, and said (to him) why doesn't he pay attention to his homilies, and
requested of him for this, that he devote his attention to them, and he (Rabba
bar bar Chunu) will reveal to him wondrous awesome novelties in them.

 

 

 

6

(6.) Torah 16 (of Likutay Moharan),
“Rabbi Yoachanan told over (Buva Basra 74a):” This Torah he said in the morning
of a Sabbath in middle of the summer of 5563 (1803).

 

At that time, unexpectedly they
(-followers of Rabbi Nachman) gathered by him for that Sabbath, because then
there wasn't any designated time for a keebootz (gathering – in Israel
they took this Breslov term for the name of their collective communities) (as
is explained elsewhere (below #126) that the main set time of congregation and
the keebootz according to his volition was six times a year), and at
first he was slightly piqued, and he said that we are making for ourselves
Sabbaths. That is, because he himself made and set for us Sabbaths to come to
be with him then, and now we made for ourselves a keebootz for Sabbath.

 

And afterwards he said, “I had
wanted to do something about the edicts which are called poonkitin
(forced conscription into the army) which are heard in the world, that they
want to decree on Israel, G-d forbid,” that is, he wanted to engage in
mitigating them and nullifying them. “However, when I am alone, what am I? For
I by myself am a simple person, therefore the people assembled unexpectedly so
that I will be able to do what I need to do for this.”

 

And he said then the concept which
is printed in Torah 166, that by Elisha, in one instance it is written plainly
Elisha, and in one instance (Kings II 4:27): “the man of G-d.” And there is (an
explication in the Zohar, Exodus 44a) that when he was by himself he is called
Elisha plainly, and when the school of prophets were by him he is called “The
Man of G-d” (apparently this was the version of the Zohar known then, in the
Zohar we have, the explanation is the opposite).

 

And he said then Torah (-holy
discourse), twice. On the night of Sabbath he said the Torah (Likutay Moharan
24) “The Middle of the World, Where Is It?” which speaks there of the nine
chambers which cannot be clung to, and cannot be known, and no one can
substantiate them etc., and in the morning, at the morning feast, he said the
aforementioned Torah (#24), which is, “Rabbi Yoachanan told over etc. and its
eyes resemble two moons.” And he said then that there are seventy nations, and
they are included in Esau and Ishmael; that this one includes

 

 

15 - Rabbi Nachman's visit which he said opened the gates to
make it much easier for everyone else to get there[1].

 

16 - Summer of 5569/1809. See Yimay Moharnat, volume 1, article
36 (in some older editions 28).
After her husband R. Pinchas passed away without children, his brother R.
Michel did yeeboom and married her (The
Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 16). (R.A.K.).

 

25

Regarding[2]

After Rabbainu o.b.m.
said over this teaching mentioned above, he said a clever quip:

Today I said three
things contrary to what the world says:

a)      The world says that telling over stories
is propitious to induce sleep. And I said that telling over stories is
propitious to arouse people from their slumber.

b)     The world says that from talking about
things nothing can be born. And I said that the tzadik’s talking about things
arouses people from their sleep, which causes barren women to conceive. 

c)      The world says that the true Tzadik of
towering stature doesn’t need a lot of money, because why does he need money?
And I said that a true Tzadik needs all the fortune of the world.

(The transcriber says:
I heard in the name of a person of the followers of Rabbainu o.b.m. who heard
from his holy mouth regarding what his desire was that they should publish the
stories also in the Yiddish (“translation”) language which we spoke, and he
said then, that it is possible for it to be very easy for a barren woman to
read from them any story and through this she would be favorably remembered
(-conceive) and would merit to have children, end of quote. And there is
support for this from what is explained in the aforementioned teaching (maamar)
that through these stories there are made conceptions of barren women).

 

33 and 162

In Rabbi Nussun’s autobiography, Yimay Moharnat – The Days of
Our Teacher Rabbi Nussun, he describes at length the events surrounding the
revelation of Torah-lesson “Azamra” (see also The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman,
article 33). This is all included in chapter
26 which begins with a declaration that he will relate how the holy book
Likutay Moharan came to be published. Rabbi Nussun then proceeds to relate how
in the summer of 567 (1807) Rabbi Nachman’s wife passed away, and Rabbi Nachman
contracted a lung disease and immediately began to talk of his own demise, he
said his health was in grave danger and exhorted everyone to pray for him.
Amongst other things, he spoke of the need of having 60 warriors surrounding
him and of his desire to be buried in Israel if it would have been feasible (as
is also documented in The Life of Our Master Leader Rabbi Nachman, article
162). Two days after Yom Kippur 568 (which was a Wednesday) Rabbi Nachman
initiated the

 

34

a story is recounted of Rabbi Nachman, on the day before the last
Rosh Hashana of his life, someone asked him for advice how to merit to
diligence in Torah study. Rabbi Nachman told him that he should not speak (bad)
of any Jew (see the explanation there, and Sichos Huran 91). The person asked
Rabbainu, what if he sees that he is a completely wicked person? Rabbainu
strongly admonished him, how he could suggest that one from (the nation of) Israel is completely wicked, for certainly there is still found in
him a bit of good or some good point where he is not wicked, and he recalled
the matter of, "a bit more and there is no wicked" which is explained
in the Torah-lesson of Azamru, see there. Based on this, Saba wrote in Blossoms
of the Spring (volume 3, letter 268. In the early
printings see volume 2, letter 119), "Also he should be careful not to speak (bad) of any one of (the nation of) Israel, just on the contrary, he should strive with all this
strength to find merit and good in each one of Israel; and even if he seems
Heaven forbid, to be completely wicked, he should strive to find in him good
points where he is not wicked, until every one of Israel is beautiful and
pleasant in his eyes."

 

 

46 - Saba Yisroel Dov Odesser o.b.m., whom Rabbainu was referring
to when he said[3], "My fire will burn
until the coming of the Messiah[4]

 

 

48 - Also when Rabbainu went to the Baal Hatanya
immediately upon his return from Israel, he turned down his host's request for
him to deliver Torah, and the Baal Hatanya proceeded to deliver Torah for 8 (or 6) hours, and Rabbainu hinted
afterwards to his followers that this was improper (Avunehu Barzel, Words and Stories of Rabbainu
o.b.m. 46, and transcriptions of Saba Yisroel Dov Odesser o.b.m.).
Also see The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 48, about when a very famous
rabbi visited Rabbainu a year before his passing, Rabbanu didn't want to
deliver Torah, see there.

 

 

55 - "This
I know already, that when a person wants to do some matter of holiness and he
has impediments on this etc.," as all this explained further on.[5]

 

 

59

And he
said to his men (on the first night of
Shavuos, Saturday Night 5569 – Life of Rabbi Nachman
59, also see there 264):
Give
your hearts to me and I will lead you on a new
path, which is the old path which our forefathers traversed
from time immemorial; and he revealed to us that there is no
remedy to be saved from the utter overwhelming (bad)
inclination,
that always quests and desires to cause man to stumble (-violate the Torah),
except
through hisbodidus, which every person wherever he may be,
whenever, and whatever level he may be, as each one knows the wounds of his heart and the pains of his soul, should set for
himself a special place to pour out his heart there before Him
Blessed He about everything that he is going
through, in our vernacular, and to request of Him that
He should draw him close to His service Blessed his,
and He should help him so that he is not ensnared in the net of the
Accuser, Heaven forbid. And even if Heaven forbid he has already stumbled
in what he violated, if he doesn't despair of himself from screaming
and praying to Hashem Yisburach, he will certainly merit to rise
from his fall. And he said in this language: “Even (afeelloo) when
one falls (az men
falt)
into
a mire (in ablutteh
arrayn) one
screams and screams and screams (shrayt men
un men shrayt un men shrayt).” And
so he spoke more of this in many many verbiages.

 

 

Rabbi Nachman revealed that
saying the following ten chapters of Psalms together serves as a
Tikun Klali – a general rectification: 16, 32,
41, 42, 59, 77, 90, 105, 137, 150. [Likutay Moharan vol. 1, 205;
vol. 2, 92; Sefer Hameedoas, Nocturnal Emission
5, Words of Rabbi Nachman 141; Life of Rabbi Nachman 59, 162, 184, 225. “General Rectification” - Likutay Moharan 29]. Many Jews say
these every day.

 

 

83

“It
is a great merit for a person when he merits to have his thoughts roam in the
words of our extremely holy and awesome Rebbe o.b.m. of whom there is no equal,
and it is impossible to relate his holy praise so as not to tarnish his honor
Heaven forbid, and all that is found in our words, any praise of our extremely
holy and awesome Rebbe o.b.m., it is necessary to know that it is all likened
to nothing, and it isn’t even like a drop of the ocean, because it is
completely impossible to relate his praise, because he was hidden with the
utmost concealment from human intellect, and even great tzadikim can not
conceive a fraction of his stature. And we don not have conception or grasp of him
whatsoever, except through the few wondrous Toaroas (-holy teachings) which
revealed in his holy books, and the awesome stories, and from this each one,
according to how much his heart can fathom, can understand slightly, a bit of
the extent of the powerful height of his holiness, beyond limit. Fortunate is
one born from a woman who merits to such a height which is elevated high and
above, what a mouth can not say, and a heart can not contemplate (end of
quotation).

 

 

107

And
in
the book "The Life of Rabbi Nachman" (107, The
Place He Lived and His Journeys 4),
it
is written: One time, after he had become famous,
Rabbi Shimon travelled with Rabbainu o.b.m. by
way of the town of Ossaitin, where Rabbainu o.b.m.
had exerted himself in his great devotions, in the house of his father-in-law, where he lived (there), and
he traveled with him by way of the fields and so forth, and Rabbainu
o.b.m. was yearning very much, and he said, "How
good it was before me over here, for in every step and step I
felt the taste of Gan (-Garden
of) Eden." For there, in those roads, he would often go and
do hisbodidus. And he was nostalgic and yearning very much,
and he said, "Behold here it was very good
before me, and for what do I need the present fame?" Also another time he told over before me, that when he was in his youth, when he went to do
hisbodidus somewhere, in the forest or in the
field, when he returned from there, the whole
world was new in his eyes, and it seemed to him as if
it was a completely different world, and the world did not appear in
his eyes at all as it had previously.

 

 

107

The
person
who merits to accustom himself to truly do hisbodidus and express
his words before Hashem Yisburach properly, especially if he merits
to do hisbodidus in the fields and forests, (then he)
will
feel with every single step he takes there, the taste of
paradise (Gan Eden).
Also subsequently when he returns from there,
(then)
the
whole world will be brand new in his eyes, and it will appear to him
as if it is a different world, completely new, and the world will not
appear at all in his eyes as it had before.

 

 

 

115 And he was full of suffering from inside and out[6].

 

117, in 5565/1805 on the Shabbos before the marriage of
Rabbainu's daughter Miriam, they sang a melody which invites all the souls of
the tzadikim of their lineage who had passed away etc., and in the evening
Rabbainu boasted that he still had not used the merit of his fathers, and what
was in the Land of Israel (i.e.
referring to what is recounted here) was on the contrary, a favor
for them.

 

Rabbi
Aryeh Leib of Volitshisk za.tza.l. from the greatest disciples of the
Magid of Mezritch - his son, Rabbi Pinchas got engaged to Miriam, the third
daughter of Rabbainu o.b.m. in Elul 5560/1800, and the wedding was in Cheshvon
5565/1804 (The Life of Our Leader Rabbi
Nachman 117).
(R.A.K.).

 

 

126

What can I tell you, there
is nothing greater than this [to be by Rabbi Nachman's tomb for
Rosh Hashana], and if other tzadikim didn't say this,
so that's another question (i.e. people have had all types of questions
and problems with Rabbi Nachman, so just mark this up as another...). [Life of
Rabbi Nachman 126, 220, 406]

 

 

article 129, it recounts that Rabbi Shimon, the first follower of
Rabbainu, escorted Rabbainu till Medzhybizh, there Rabbi Shimon got sick and couldn't continue. It
is also brought down there that on the way to Medzhybizh, upon R. Shimon's
request they went by way of Vilkhovets (-there
are quite a few towns in the Ukraine with this name, but the only one that I
found that satisfactorily fits the parameters of being on the way to Medzhybizh
is Vil'khovets', Cherkas'ka oblast, 20260, which is apx. 130 km west of
Medvedivka, and 285 km east of Medzhybizh) where they picked up another man who joined them. In
Medzhybizh Rabbainu visited his parents.

 

article 129, Rabbainu told Rabbi Shimon that the Baal
Shem Tov (who is buried in Medzhybizh, but Rabbainu
hadn't visited the tomb) appeared to him at night and told him to
travel to Kaminitz, and to stay there for 8-10 days, see there at length. 

 

article 130, it is brought down, that when Rabbainu
returned from Kaminitz, on Shabbos he said a Torah on the verse (Psalms
63), "My soul binds after You," and extremely wondrous
Torah, and he boasted of himself profusely saying, "And if when I just
came from Kaminitz I am saying such Torah, when I came from the Land of Israel
all the very more so that I will merit to reveal very much more awesome
Torah." And in article 131 there, it is brought down that when he returned
from Kaminitz one of his daughters passed away, and he said, "Like this
and like this, Heaven forbid, should pass away by me, for (even)
one movement that is different by me from before I was in Kominitz to after I
was there," may Hashem save us.

 

 

article 132, it says that Rabbainu traveled by way of
Nikolayev and Kherson to Odessa, and he spent the holiday of Shavuos (6-7
Sivan – 21-22 May, 1798) in Kherson. Kherson is another 90 km
south east of Nikolayev, completely out of the way, so either Rabbainu had
something to do there, or he chose it as the best nearby place to spend Shavuos
(Kherson is very similar to Har Sin – Mount
Sinai (In the Torah sometimes Sinai is refered to as
Sin) where the Torah was given!).
There we are told that Rabbainu delivered wondrous Torahs and he heard the
thundering of the Receiving of the Torah, see there at length (there is actually a town in Israel by this name, see
Talmud, Moed Kutun 3b and Rashi there, and Zevuchim 110b).

It is also brought down there, in the
uncensored version, that over there, followers of the first Lubavitcher Rebbe,
Rabbi Shneur Zalman of Liadi, brought before him Torahs from there Rebbe, and
Rabbainu refuted his words before his followers, and showed them that it was
not so as he said (Also, see Siach Sarfay Kodesh (5:64)
That Rabbainu asked him why he is teaching esoteric Kabala to his people,
because Rabbainu had spoken with some/many of them, and they came to speak
about kabala, and he asked them a question, and they didn't answer
appropriately. This in fact was one of the problems R.A.Kalisker had.).

Even still we find that Rabbainu had great
respect for the first Lubavitcher Rebbe (see Avunehu Barzel 46, that
Rabbainu called him "Saar (-minister) Hu'elef (-of a thousand)"
[However, it should be noted that Rabbainu said of the Rabbi Baruch, another
adversary of the Lubavitcher Rebbe, that he is a "Saar" over tens of
thousands of souls – Siach Sarfay Kodesh 3:90, 4:626, Stories from Shmuel
Horowitz 1], and in Siach Sarfay Kodesh (2:147)
Rabbainu called him a true talmid chucum (-Torah scholar)
and thus kept goading a benefactor to give a much greater donation to him as
befitting a true talmid chuchum, and in the Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman,
article 324, and in Siach Sarfay Kodesh 2:109, Rabbainu acknowledged that he
was one of the leading producers of original Torah insights of the generation.
Therefore, it is definitely unacceptable to say or certainly write anything
slighting his honor G-d forbid. 

All of this is extremely pertinent and
significant here because one of the things Rabbainu accomplished on this voyage
was to make a truce between the first Lubavitcher Rebbe and Rabbi Avrohom
Kalisker of Tiberius. R.A.Kalisker was vehemently against the printing of the
Tanya, and he wrote letters to the Bal (author of)
Hatanya explaining how this was against the teachings and the holy ways of the
Bal Shem Tov and Magid of Medzhrizh. This conflict jeopardized almost the
entire Jewish establishment in the Holy Land which depended almost completely
on the funds sent to them from the diaspora, of which R.A.Kalisker was in
charge of distributing, and as long as he banned the printing of the Tanya, the
Bal Hatanya was not wont to send the funds.

Further on in this book the reader will see the
great acclaim Rabbainu had for R.A.Kalisker, saying that he was the only tzadik
that he had seen that had perfection, and Rabbainu greatly praised his Torah.
The conversations between Rabbainu and R.A.Kalisker are not known, but
apparently their conclusion was not to uphold the ban against the printing of
the Tanya. Unfortunately all the reasons that R.A.Kalisker had for opposing its
printing also came to fruition, the rest of this sentence has been omitted as
the intention is only to promote improvement, peace, and harmony. [It should be noted that the Maggid of Medzhrizh had
tried to steer his young disciple primarily towards the study of halacha,
and he directed him (in a letter written
to him in 5530/1769, printed in Magid Devurav Li-Yaakov pg. 618) to only study Kabbala at night, and not to ponder its
difficulties just to ask all his uncertainties to him (-the Maggid), or
his son. Rabbi Nachman also emphasized the study of halacha as a
safeguard for correct holy study, as explained at length elsewhere.]

Upon Rabbainu's return from the Holy Land he (did
not even get out of the wagon, but) proceeded immediately to
Liadi to speak with the Bal Hatanya about this (The Life of Our Leader Rabbi
Nachman 113, Avunehu Barzel 46 see there at length). However, in
The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman, article 150, there is a letter from
R.A.Kalisker to Rabbainu complaining that they still have not received the
funds.

 

 

133, it says that Rabbainu made him a messenger to his
grandfather Rabbi Nachman of Hordenke whose buried in Tiberius, and afterwards
when he was longer able to (-possibly because his
father-in-law figured out that he was making the predawn excursions, as is
related in the reference in the next note), he needed to go to
Israel to speak in person with his grandfather to set up a different method.

 

In the Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 133, it says
that one of the reasons Rabbainu wanted to go to Israel was to fulfill all the
mitzvos of the Holy Land and to combine all the mitzvos of the Holy Land
together with all the mitzvos of chutz lu-uretz and fulfill them spiritually,
and we know that Rabbainu achieved everything he set out to do in Israel
immediately upon walking four cubits. So already he had attained the know-how
of fulfilling all the mitzvos spiritually, so what is being described here, is
something even more esoteric and complex, to actually fulfill the mitzvos
physically while operating almost solely from a spiritual plane.

 

 

134 - because
promptly and immediately he attained what he attained, because he said[7],
that immediately when he walked four cubits in the land of Israel[8],
he accomplished what he desired to attain

 

133-5 Rabbainu did reveal different things that he
merited to in Israel. E.g. previously in part 1, article 22, it says that in
Israel he merited to be completely good etc. see there. And in The Life of Our
Leader Rabbi Nachman it provides a few other reasons. In article 133 it says
that he wanted to fulfill all the mitzvos of the Land of Israel see there at
length (see notes on the end of article 22).
Also it says that Rabbainu had to visit his grandfather who is buried in
Tiberius, to set up a method of communication between them, as noted in part 1,
end of article 20. In article 134 it gives another reason, that even though he
had already attained chuchmuh 
 tatu'u 

(as the Rabbi here told Rabbainu),
he wanted to travel to Israel to attain chuchmu eelu'u 
. And in article 135 Rabbainu revealed that he could have attained
everything without going to Israel, except then it would have been untamable (so
to speak) pure attainment, but by going to Israel he gained that
he could master the attainment so as to even be able to clothe it, which is the
difference between Shabbos and the other Holidays, see there.

 

 

135

And
this
is was is explained in the writings (of the Arizal, see at length in the Siddur of Rabbi Yaakov
Kuppel, Shaar Mikru'ay Kodesh;
Life of Rabbi Nachman, article 135), that
on Sabbath very great additional light (-spirituality) is
received (clothed) in
garments, whereas on Yom Tov the additional light is smaller than (that
of) Sabbath,
but it is without garments, and all of this is due to what
was explained above, because on Sabbath the
ascension of prayer is also complete, and through
prayer it is possible to receive all the great and awesome
lights (clothed) in
garments, which are made and finished through prayer, which is the aspect of faith. Because Sabbath is called Kallah (-bride) because
it is killoola (-a composite replete)
with kul (everything), as
is brought down (see
Zohar, Beraishis page 265a, and Shemos
page 92a),
because
faith and prayer, which is the aspect of the sanctity of Sabbath,
is a composite replete with all the lights of the world,
because all the lights, which are impossible to
receive through any knowledge, can be received through
faith, the aspect of prayer, which is the aspect of Sabbath,
as mentioned above. Whereas on Yom Tov, when the additional sanctity
of the very day is just in the aspect of Torah, consequently the
light received is not so lofty, and it is without garments,
because the main garments and vessels are finished through prayer, as mentioned above.

 

 

 

136 - That first Shabbos he spent in the town of Skulye (-Skelivka?), and Rabbi
Menachem Mendel of Vitepesk (who
was a mentor of both Rabbi Avrohom Kalisker and the Bal Hatanya. R.M.M.V. moved
up to Israel in 5537/1777, and passed away in 5547/1778 (R.A.K.), see also article 32) appeared
to him and revealed to him a Kabalistic rite to safely passage on the sea, which
is recorded in Likutay Moharan, Torah-teaching 256.

 

 

article 137, it records that a certain soul of a deceased
appeared to Rabbainu then, see there.

 

138 - article 138, it writes that Rabbainu set a precedent
with this, and subsequently this became the established way. This is just one
example of many things that Rabbainu pioneered and afterwards became a standard
practice. This aspect of being a trailblazer is motif of Rabbainu, see e.g. The
Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 235 and 240 (-Likutay
Moharan 86), and Words of Rabbi Nachman 200. Also see another
amazing example in the Hebrew notes at the beginning of Sefer Hamidos published
in English under the title, Character.

 

 

139-40 This is elaborated on in The Life of Our Leader
Rabbi Nachman 139-140, and Rabbainu revealed there that this is why the Baal
Shem Tov (see there regarding Rabbi Naftoli Katz, and in
article 12 in the notes, ascribing RNK as the subject of Likutay Moharan 218 –
that he saw his impending passing, and tried to hide himself by traveling to
Israel, but on the way he was accorded tremendous fanfare, and he passed away)
couldn't make it to the Holy Land because he couldn't bring himself down to
such littleness, see there. See also article 13.

 

 

In The Life Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 141 it relates that on
his passage on the Mediterranean, Rabbainu studied from the books of the Mishna
he had with him, see there at length

 

142 - when
he would be incapacitated in the place where they would sell him Heaven forbid[9]

 

145 - Also later on, when they were already passed the
Diniester River, they were forced to change into the indigenous clothing, and
because of this the people thought them to be susceptible to sin G"f, and
in Uman they had a test, see The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 145.

 

145-6-9 From Yas, Rabbainu went to Teplik, and to
Uman, and he visited the Shpoila Zeide (The Life of Our Leader Rabbi
Nachman 145-6 see there at length), and then when he was near
Kaniblad, the Magid of Tiruveetzeh ran to greet him, as is recounted in The
Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 149 (R.A.K.). And
upon arriving home, he didn't even get off the carriage, but immediately
proceeded to visit the Baal Hatanya to arrange a truce between him and Rabbi
Avrohom Kalisker so that the Baal Hatanya would resume sending the collected
charity to Israel (Avunehu Barzel, Words and Stories of Rabbainu
o.b.m. 46).

 

 

175 - However,
of himself he said, that if he were to know that he is now on the same height
and level as a year ago, he would not be conciliated ("desirous of")
with himself at all[10],
(and he spoke disparagingly of himself regarding the aforementioned matter if
he were to remain in the level of the previous year), just, every time he
ascends from level to level.

 

 

181

to which Rabbainu answered with a parable of a King who had
wise men with whom he took counsel, and a friend with whom he would play chess
(See all of this at length in the addendum to The Life of Our Leader Rabbi
Nachman 181

 

 

212 - Also note that the Arizal revealed that
in the future the halacha will be like the House of Shamai, and Rabbainu
revealed that in the future (or at least with regard to
the halachos of the future) the halacha will be like the Rambam (See
Siach Sarfay Kodesh 2:56), and Rabbainu also said that the
halacha is like Rav Nachman, alluding to himself (The
Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 212, and transcripts of Saba Yisroel).

 

 

215 - This seems to be alluding to more than just the
aforementioned concept of descent for the sake of ascent, seethe Life of Our
Leader Rabbi Nachman 215 (and Yimay Moharnat, vol. 1,
article 51) and Likutay Moharan, volume 2, Torah-teaching 78,
where Rabbainu revealed that sometimes even the greatest tzadik is forced to
detach from Torah study, and in those times he draws life to himself and to the
world through his complete simplicity, and this puts him on the paradigm of the
unconditional love of Hashem, the aspect of derech eretz which
precedes the Torah, which is derech 
 eretz

, and this is why Moshe was praying to enter Israel not on
account of his merits but just because of Hashem's free-unconditional kindness.
See there at length, because this obviously is what Rabbainu was engaged in
now. 

[1]
See above article 10 and the footnote there citing The Life of Our Leader Rabbi
Nachman, that since Israel is the highest of the high, one first needs to
descend to the lowest littleness.

 

 

215 - And
sometimes he swore[11]
on this, that he truthfully knows nothing at all[12]

 

215 andn 283 - See
the next article #35, and see Words of Rabbi Nachman 3 - about the tachlis
(ultimate extent or purpose) of knowledge is not knowing.
And see The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 215 and 283. And see Yimay
Moharnat, vol. 1 article 51.

 

221 - This
word is actually found in the Talmud, Kedushin 70b, however in The Life of Our
Leader Rabbi Nachman 221 it says that they prayed in the hamber of the
house (and Rabbainu used it as a
pun, see there), and
the translation given there is terrace.

 

223 - However, the greatness and massiveness of the harsh and
enormous suffering that he had at the end of his days for three consecutive
years, were yet much, much greater and harsher manifold ("double and
quadruple"), unfathomable and beyond any reckoning. And a little of this
will be explained elsewhere (see The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman, the
section addressing his trip to Lemberg[13] and
the section of his trip and stay in Uman[14], and
The Days of Our Teacher Rabbi Nussun), if it is Hashem's will, a slight fringe

 

 

225

Rebbe Nachman said that all
of his teachings and sayings are not only for us.
Rather, “for those who are here standing with us today and for those
who are not here with us today” (Devarim 29:14). In other words,
it is for the generations that are yet to come. He spoke to us about
this many times and he hinted to us in his words to make it known
to the future generations… One time when he told us about passing
on everything that happened with us and everything we heard from
him to our children, he said this verse with great passion like fiery
coals, “You should make known to your children and your childrens'
children.” And he said, “Know and believe, if its possible
to take one person out of the garbage dump, anyone who holds on
to that person will come out as well.” [Words of Rabbi Nachman 209;
Life of Rabbi Nachman 225]

 

 

Our Rabbi of blessed
memory already assured us during his lifetime, and designated
two kosher witnesses on this, that when he passes away,
when [people] come to his grave and give a penny to charity (*) and say these ten Tehilim/Psalms that we have recorded for
remedy for nocturnal emission, Heaven spare
us, then our Rabbi himself will span the length and width
[of the universe], and will surely save this person. And he said,
that he will pull him out of Ge'hinom/hell by his peyos/sidelocks, even regardless of how that person be, and even
regardless of what happened, only from now on he must
accept on himself to not return to his wicked ways
Heaven forbid. And the night before he passed away,
he said: "What do you have to worry
about, since I go before you; and if the souls
who did not know me at all, look forward to my tikunim/remedies,
all the more so [should] you" etc.
(And likewise even those who were not privileged to know our
Rabbi of blessed memory during his lifetime, when they come to
his holy grave and rely on him and learn his holy
books and accustom themselves to walk in his holy ways
that are mentioned in his holy books, surely they have on what to rely.
Fortunate are they! Fortunate is their portion!
"And none of them that take refuge in Him shall be desolate" [Ps. 34:23], for he already revealed his
mind in several terms, explicitly and by hint, that all that he
is involved in with us is not only for us, but
with "those who are here...and
with those who are not here" [Deut.
29:14], as explained further below (see Sichos Haran 209).) (*) Printer's comment [Rabbi Natan]: I
heard from Rabbi Naftali z"l,
who was one of the two witnesses who Rabbeinu z"l designated on this matter, i.e. Morainu Harav
Aharon z"l and Harav Rabbi Naftali as
mentioned, that Rabeinu z"l
said it then in these words: "When
they come to my grave and give a penny to
charity for my sake (he means, for remembrance of his
holy soul, as commonly practiced), ..." and in Yiddish: "in vet
gebin apruta tzedaka fun maynit wegin etc"/and
will give a penny of charity for me."

 

 

229 and 322

I
have already finished, and I will finish

 

229 see 46

 

 

230

His exertion in the Service of Hashem 1)
it
is written: that he would frequently take a horse
from his father-in-law's house, and he would ride on it
to some forest, and there he would come down from the
horse and tie it to some tree, and he went into the forest to do his (part), to
do hisbodidus there as was his practice. And many times the
horse freed itself and fled from his place (back) to
the house of his father-in-law. And when they saw there that the horse
came back alone, they worried and were very fearful, for they said,
certainly he fell from the horse, Heaven forbid. And many times heavy
rains fell upon him when he was in the forest, and afterwards he
would come home an hour into the night or later. And see below (inside
this book, article 28)
where
I copied down there from his holy words, that in the place where
vegetation grows, namely in the field or in the forest, it is very
good to do hisbodidus there.

 

 

231

And
so
it is written in the book "The
Life of Rabbi Nachman" (231,
His
exertion and toil in the service of Hashem 2), that
when he was still a little boy, around six
years old, he yearned very much to receive Sabbath in great
holiness as would be proper. And he went to the bathhouse erev (-the
day preceding) Sabbath
immediately right after midday, and he ritually immersed himself
with alacrity, and came right away to his house and put on his
Sabbath clothing, and entered the Bais Medrash (House of Torah Study and usually prayers as well),
and
went here and there, wanting to draw upon himself
the holiness of Sabbath, and the additional Neshama (soul). And
he desired to see something, but did not see (anything) at
all. In the interim, men began to come into the Bais
Medrash, and some important man came and
stood near his table where he prayed, which is
called in Yiddish a shtender (lectern), and
he began to recite Song of Songs, and he (Na Nach Nachma Nachman MeUman)
o.b.m.
went, and inserted his head below, inside the shtender, and because
he was still a little child, they didn't take issue with
him, and he was perched there, and he began to cry
before Hashem Yisburach. And he cried very much with a
deluge of tears, several hours until the evening, until his eyes became
swollen (which is called gishvullin),
and
afterwards he opened his eyes and it appeared to him as if he saw some
sort of aura, because the candles had already been lit, and his eyes
were so closed up from crying, and then his mind was somewhat set
at ease, see there. And so afterwards, when he got older, he didn't
abandon this holy way of his, as I copied down above, that also
when he lived in Zlatopole', after he came from the Land of Israel,
he went to do hisbodidus outside the city with another man,
and he cried then very much before Him Blessed He, until he tarried in his crying almost a complete summer day without
cessation.

 

And
I
heard from my father and teacher o.b.m. (R' Asher Zelig of Teplic),
that
one time our master, leader, and rabbi zatza"l sat in his room and
cried so very profusely before Hashem Yisburach, and the
tears rolled down his eyes to the floor, until the
floor became so damp from the tears that the heel of his
shoe stuck to the floor because of the moisture of the tears. And so
I heard further from him, that one time during the holy days of Succos,
when our master, leader, and rabbi zatza"l circled the beema (large lectern in middle of the synagogue)
with
the esrog and his
species (-lulav etc.),
his
men saw afterwards, on the floor, in the place that he
went around the beema,
the floor was damp from his tears, that he
poured out then when he circled the beema.

 

 

 

239 – 

And
even
though he merited to what he merited, even still his prayer and hisbodidus
between himself and his Creator was with extreme humility,
and with a broken heart, with simplicity, and with temimus, as it is written in the
book "The Life of Rabbi Nachman" (239, His
exertion and toil in the service of Hashem 10),
that
one time he was asked by one of the young youths how to do
hisbodidus, and he taught him how to say
before Hashem Yisburach, 'Master of the World, have mercy on
me etc., for is it conceivable that my life go by
in such folly, and that this is what I was created for?! [And in Yiddish: Ha-yittuchain az ess zul meer azzuy avvec gen dee
velt, bin ich den foon dest veggen
bashaffin givvurrin etc.].
Afterwards, at some time, this guy stood behind the walls of Rabbainu o.b.m., and he heard that Rabbainu o.b.m. himself poured
out his heart before Hashem Yisburach in similar words.

 

And
so
too after our master, leader, and rabbi zatza"l said the
homily (Likutay
Moharan 206),
"I
have strayed like a lost sheep (Psalms 119:176) etc." where he explains that the way of Hashem Yisburach is to call a person immediately when he sees
him straying from the sensible way. There are
those that He calls with a hint, and there are those that
He calls with an actual calling, and there are those
that He kicks and hits, because the Torah proclaims before Him (Zohar
vol. 3, 36a, 58a),
"Until
when will the foolish be attracted after foolish persuasions (Proverbs
1:22)."
And
the Torah is Hashem Yisburach Himself, that He calls them, and requests
them to return to Him. Therefore while he still has not overly
strayed from the straight way, then it is possible for him to return
with ease, because he still recognizes the voice of Hashem Yisburach
and the Torah, and he is familiar with it, for he had recently
been with Hashem Yisburach, and he had been hearing His voice
– the voice of the Torah – and he still has not forgotten the
voice, therefore it is possible for him to return with ease. And this
is like the parable of the shepherd, when one sheep strays from the
way, then immediately he calls it; and as long as the sheep still hasn't
strayed much from the way, then it recognizes the voice and immediately
follows it. But when it has strayed a lot from the way,
then it has already forgotten the voice of the shepherd, and doesn't recognize it, and the shepherd also despairs from
continuing to ask for it, because it was so long
since it had went and strayed from him. So too when a person
already tarried long, Heaven forbid, in his evil, and he turned
and strayed a great deal from the straight way to those
crooked and deviating ways, then it is difficult for him to return
etc.. And this is (Psalms 119:176), "I
strayed like a lost sheep," that
is, I strayed from the straight way like a lost sheep that
diverged from the way as mentioned above.
Therefore I ask from before You (ibid: end of the verse),
"request
your servant, for Your mitzvos I
have not forgotten." That is, You
should hasten to call me immediately, as long as
I remember, and have not forgotten yet the voice of Your mitzvos etc., see there. And
it is written in the book "The
Life of Rabbi Nachman" (ibid - 239, His exertion and toil in the service of Hashem 10), that
when our master, leader, and rabbi zatza"l revealed this homily, he said to his holy student, the rav, Rabbi
Nussun zatza"l, that this homily is now (in these times)
his
hisbodidus.

 

And
if
you know and heard a little of his utmost wondrous exertion and toil
in the service of Hashem from his very youth (as is explicated somewhat in the books
"Words of Rabbi Nachman," and "The Life of Rabbi Nachman"),
and
his utmost wondrous holy, and awesome, and
extremely incredible, perceptions, as is known and
understood somewhat to anyone who peruses his holy books,
which the world merited to enjoy them, besides his other holy compositions
which the world has not merited to enjoy (them), like
the books which he ordered to be burned, and his
"Hidden Book,"
in the aspect of (Genesis 1:4 with Rashi),
"And
G-d saw that the light was good – to put away
in concealment, as this is explained elsewhere (The Life of Rabbi Nachman, 169 and onwards; His Trip To
Lemberg 3-),
aside
from 'esoteric wisdom' (Job 11:6) which
he merited to perceive, which we did not merit to know
from them, even from hearsay (or conveyance/an idea - alone/),
just
knowledge of their existence alone. And after all this
he entered the service of Hashem with such true temimus, to the
extent that he said in hisbodidus before Hashem Yisburach, "I have strayed like a lost sheep
etc.," in the construct explained
in this homily mentioned above. And certainly
if you reflect on this, you will be very amazed at
the utter temimus of the righteousness
of Rabbainu o.b.m.. But in truth,
behold this verse itself was said by King David r.i.p.
at the end of the eight faces (i.e. Psalms 119, which has eight verses for each letter of
the aleph beth),
which
has in it very awesome and exalted secrets. And who
doesn't know and believe in the enormous stature of the level of King
David r.i.p., and even still he said of himself,
"I have strayed like a lost sheep etc.," for His greatness Blessed He is unfathomable. 

 

 

 

article 230: I heard from his holy mouth many times that the
fundamental thing is contingent just on exertions, and devotions etc., and
through this any person can come to great levels etc., and he said, "I can
make a kosher man whom is called a 'gitter yid (-good Jew, i.e. euphemism for a Chasidic
master)' mamash like myself."

 

232-3 - he had many, many innumerable great tests in this
desire, that he had the ability to fulfill his desire and he was in very
extremely great danger, but he was mighty strong and he surmounted his
inclination and quashed his desire many (many) times, and even still he would
not distance himself a second time to run from a test, just on the contrary, he
desired tests, and he would pray to Hashem Yisburach to summon for him
tests, because how is it possible for him to do a sin Heaven forbid and
transgress the desire of Hashem Yisburach(?!)[15],
only if he would become crazy Heaven forbid at that time[16], but
since he would have some sort of intellect (in the world) at the time of the
test, certainly he would be able to withstand it[17]
according to the greatness of the strength of his heart that he was extremely
strong in Hashem; and even still when he was confronted with the test, he was
in very great danger[18], and
he would scream to Hashem Yisburach profusely until he merited to
surmount his inclination and to be saved, and even still he did not distance
himself from a test another time, even though at the time of the test it was
extremely difficult for him as mentioned above. And so it was many (many)
times, extremely numerous to no measure, and Hashem Yisburach was to his
succor, and he merited to surmount his inclination and to break the
conflagration of the inferno

 

Similarly, in Likutay Moharan, Torah-teaching 72,
regarding the great praises of Joseph withstanding the test, Rabbainu says it
doesn't mean the simple physical feat of not succumbing to the temptation, but
there is a secret to it (-already Rashi points out that the wife of
Poateephar showed him that she was really destined to him from Heaven, and she
wasn't far off, just, it was her daughter that was destined from him. This
already could have imposed a tremendous dilemma and test, and similarly we find
with King David and Bas Sheva, that she was really destined for David).
Also see The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman, article 233, where Rabbainu says
that he doesn't understand all the stories of various sages who were tested in
this desire, because it should not have been a test at all, and there must be a
secret to it.

 

 

 

article 234, that there are tzadikim who broke their (bodily) desires, but they are
like a hide which has been tanned which still retains a slightly undesirable
smell, however, he merited that his body was completely clean and tanned from
all the desires to the extent that it didn't have a trace of odor.

 

 

235 - Also see there article 20 and Likutay
Moharan 2:24 that for everyone it is critical that they be joyous the entire
day, and just for a selected hour in the day to have a broken-heart, and as to
why to Rabbainu was different see The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman,
articles 235 and 236.

 

 

 

 

238 and 240 article 238,
once Rabbainu's mother asked him why he doesn't force himself to eat a little,
for with what will he live? Rabbainu answered her that he was living then with
"the wisdom will give life to its possessor (Koheles
7)," and that he has followers who that have knowledge of
such things with which they can live without eating or drinking. And in the
brackets there it is written that it is obvious that his intention was that
they could live with an extreme minimal amount of consumption. According to the
brackets, Rabbainu's mother saw him eating – forcing himself to eat – as it
says here, but deemed it too scant and negligible to possibly live on, and she
thus tried to get him to eat more. If we do not accept the brackets then we
must say that there were different times, sometimes Rabbainu was able to do
away with eating altogether (-or at least the minimal
amount that is considered eating, as elucidated in a previous note),
and at times he needed to eat some very small amount. See the coming paragraph
about the little he ate when he was at sea, which previously he didn't even eat
that little amount, and contemplate if this allows for the approach of the
brackets mentioned above.

Also see The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman,
article 240, how one time Rabbainu revealed tremendous secrets to his brother
Rabbi Yichiel, and his brother was so overcome with emotion, he was crying, and
yearning exceedingly with wondrous arousal, to the extent that a few days
passed by in which he wasn’t able to eat or sleep etc., he just sat crying
heavily from the yearning etc. see there.

 

241 - and
he would hide himself there and recite Psalms and he would scream silently[19]
to Hashem Yisburach

 

 

245

“I am a beautiful and wondrous tree with great awesome
branches, but below I am set firmly in the ground.”

///

I
am a very beautiful and wondrous tree with very wondrous branches, and below I
am set in the ground mamash

 

246

If
I desired to reveal of myself – the entire world would run after me

 

247

“A chidoosh (novelty) like me
never existed in the world.” 

///

Once,
Rabbainu Hakadosh za.tza.l. sat together with his disciple the holy rav, the
Maggid (-preacher) of Teerhuveetzeh who was an old man, and had previously been
from the elite disciples of the Baal Shem Tov za.tza.l., a friend of the Maggid
of Mezritch (-the primary disciple of the Besh”t), and he (Rabbainu) grasped
the beard of the aforementioned Maggid in an endearing fashion, and said to
him, “A novelty like me has never yet been in the world

 

 

248

the
world needs me very very much, because the world is not able to be without me
whatsoever

 

250

“The whole world needs me. You (my students) already know how
much you need me, however, even all the Tzaddikim need me, for
they too need to be benefited. All the nations of
the world need me as well.”

 

 

251

I
have the ability to return the whole world to propriety, not only the simple
people, but even all the tzadikim and great men I can return them to propriety,
because also the tzadikim need to be returned to propriety, and not only holy
Israelites but even all the nations of the world, all of them, I can return
them to Hashem Yisburach,and I could return them to Hashem Yisburach to lead
them close to the religion of Israel,however it is sufficient for a servant to
be as his Master

 

 

258

I
know clearly that I am the sole leader of the generation, and there is no
leader like me

 

 

259

There
will yet come a time when you will be very rueful for having in your hands such
a wondrous novelty and you abandoned him etc.

 

 

260 – reference: 

a.     
Miforsumim

 shel 
 shekehr 
 vet eer ziyehr
bifnayhem nit un kiken 
, eer

 hut 
 shoyn 
 farzicht 

oongarishen 
 vine 
[20].

 

 

264

He
said, I will lead you (plural) in a new way which was never in the world

 

269 and 276 he boasted of himself of his enormous virtue/height in
the attribute of humility in the utmost complete (self) nullification[21].

 

 

272

[1] In The Life of Our Leader Rabbi
Nachman article 272, Rabbi Nachman is quoted as asserting that he is "saba
disabin," and Rabbi Nussun offers a deep insight into this, see there.
However, his insight avoids recognition of the most apparent inference to the
holy soul who reveals great secrets to Rabbi Shimon Bar Yochai in the Zohar,
this soul is attributed to Adam, and this would concur with the Breslov tradition
that Rabbi Nachman attained the soul of Adam which had departed from him as he
decided to sin. Today it is popular to say that Rabbi Nachman was asserting
that he was this exact soul. This may or many not be, I am not privy to such
high secrets. The title "saba disabin" most probably denotes a
correlation to the Divine Countenance of Erech Anpin which the Zohar also
refers to as "saba disabin" (see the explanation in Adir Bamurom page
114), however, one must be very aware not to confuse the two, one being a soul
created by G-d, and the latter being an actual Divine Countenance.

 

 

 

282-3 see 215 - to merit
to a higher level of the tachlis of not knowing, and so forth forever.
(And this is already explained a little in our words elsewhere[22])

 

See
The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 282, Rabbainu said that he had just gained
knowledge that the tachlis of knowledge is not knowing, means really not
knowing, and this is something that seems obvious and cannot be explained, but
was a new understanding, and even though he had now attained this understanding
he still knows nothing, because previously he had also thought that he had come
to this tachlis of not knowing and yet only now he understands that it
is to really not know, and he had been very far from this new comprehension,
see there.

 

 

293

What
have you (-there is no need for you) to contemplate strategies, you only need
to provide stones and mortar, and I build from them wondrous and awesome
structures. And he protracted the word “structures” to aggrandize the praise of
the wonders of the splendor of the awesome structures he builds with this

 

294-5

And
he said, behold I am a treasure house of fear of Heaven, so why are they not
avidly running after me to receive it. And they asked him, how is it possible
to receive, and he answered, with the mouth and the heart, it is necessary to
tunnel and request

 

296

I
want to reveal and imbue fear (of Heaven) in my men, wondrous fear (of Heaven)
that as of yet there has never been fear (of Heaven) such as this in the world

 

 

300

He
said, behold, also he who touches me a bit, even with a small finger – there is
no measure to his virtue

 

314

The
most inferior of my men I lead him in the way of a very great tzadik etc.

 

 

322 (also see 229)

Whoever
will draw close to the men of my persuasion, and even he who just touches them,
will certainly be a truly kosher (-upright) person, and not just a kosher
person, but even a very great tzadik, he will be, he who merits to draw close
to my men

 

 

332

“I am a river that purifies all stains.”

///

He
said, I am a river which purifies (from) all stains

 

 

339

In
the future the entire world will be men of Breslov. “I will put in you (plural)
lev 
 bussar 
 (Yechezkel 11:19, 36:26)” - letters
(of ‘lev busar’ are the same as:) Breslov

 

 

346

“You should constantly review my teachings until you know
them by heart.”

 

 

350

“All my teachings are introductions.”
[Words of Rabbi Nachman 200] “My teachings are completely ideational
aspects.” 

 

 

 

359  - "Rectifications
of the Zohar," this work reveals 70 ways of understanding the first word
of the Torah: Biraishis (See Sichos HuRan- Words
of Rabbi Nachman, article 285). Rabbainu revealed (The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman, article 359)
that this work is much loftier than the rest of the Zohar, and he revealed that
it includes all the wisdoms of the world (Ibid
364, Sichos HuRan – Words of Rabbi Nachman, article 128) and he extolled
it immensely, and studied it frequently throughout the year (Ibid).

 

 

364

The Life Of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman

364

(25) One time I
(Rabbi Nussun) spoke with him (Rabbainu NNNNM) about the Kabballah of the Ar”i
(-Lion, acronym, The Godly Rabbi Yitzchok[23])
o.b.m., and he said that the Kabballah of the Arizal is completely in unison
with the Kabballah which our Teacher Rav Moshe Kordivero (Rama”k) o.b.m.
composed. After some years, it reoccurred that I spoke with him about the
Kabballah which the Arizal revealed, and he said that his Kabballah is distant
and extremely superior from the Kabballah of the author of the Pardess[24]
o.b.m.. And I stood aghast, and I asked him fearfully, “Did I not hear from
your (-respectful plural) mouth once that really it is all one?” And he
answered, “Presumably if I said that, I knew what I said.” And the words are
seemingly incognizable and sealed. However, he who has a heart to understand,
can comprehend from afar that everything is correct, and his words are living
and enduring, and everything is true and upholding, and correct, and enduring[25], and
just. Because in truth certainly everything is one in the immanence
(-pineemeyus) of the faith, in the real truth. However, even still, the way of
the revelation of the secrets of the Arizal is far and very superior from the
ways of the Pardess, even though in real truth it is all one. And it is
impossible to elaborate on this matter because (Proverbs 25:2), “The honor of
G-d is the hidden matter,” “And the keenly wise will understand (Daniel
12:10).”[26]

 

(26[27]) He
(Rabbi Nachman) related that he knew all the words/matters of the Aitz Chaim,
and Pree Aitz Chaim, and all the (other) writings of the Arizal, and the Book
of the Zohar, and most importantly the Tikunim (-Tikunay Zohar). And it was
understood from his words that this was in the days of his youth. And several
times he very radically praised the greatness of the holiness of the Tikunay
Zohar. And he would frequently engage in it exceedingly, even the whole year,
even not in the days of (the month of) Elul[28]. And
he said that in the book of the Tikunim are included all the wisdoms of the
world.

 

 

 

372 - Thus Rabbainu said (The
Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 372) that there was no limb of a
person upon which he did not say Torah, see there, because Torah comes by
virtue of humility (Likutay Moharan 14, and many other places).

 

 

381

He
said, if the Bal Shem Tov would hear my Torah it would be a novelty to him as
well, if Ra.sh.b.i. (Rabbi Shimon Bar Yochai) would hear my Torah it would also
be a novelty even then

 

383 - about listing the many books he authored after his
name. And also regarding what Rabbainu said (introduction to Yaalas Chain pg. 26) that there will
come a time that they will print his book with commentaries surrounding it,
like the Talmud with the commentaries of Rashi and Tosfos, and so in fact they
did.

 

 

392

“How could they not oppose me, for I walk a new path, one
that no man has ever walked before, nor any
creature since the time the Torah was received. Even though
it is a very old path, nevertheless it is completely new.”

////

How
is it possible for them not to oppose me, being that I go in a new way that as
of yet no man has went in it ever etc., even though it is an (extremely)
ancient way, even still it is completely new

 

394

“There are those who are against me yet they don’t even know me
at all. This is as it says in the Zohar,
when the Torah states that Pharaoh said to the Egyptians,
“Let’s outsmart the Jews.” Could it be that he went to each
and every citizen to personally relate this message? Rather he
inserted it into their hearts.”

 

395

I heard from Rabbi Yudel the retelling of the things he
heard from Our Rabbi o.b.m.. He spoke up and said: Abraham our forefather also
had tremendous suffering from such stories (i.e. like the matter of the stories
and suffering which transpired over him). Because Abraham our forefather also
drew the youth close to Hashem Yiburach. For he converted converts as is known
(Biraishis Rabba 39). And his way was, that he would come inside an city, and
he would run inside the city, and he would shout, ‘oy oy, gevald gevald’. And
they would run after him like people chase after a madman, and he would make
copious claims with them that they all were in great errors, because he was an
expert in all the logic and explanations of the ways of their idolatry, because
the idolatry of the early ones, they had with it many fallacious explanations
and logic. And Abraham our forefather r.i.p. was very proficient in all their
explanations and the ways of their errors. And he would prove to them and show
them that it was all a mistake, and he revealed to them the true holy faith.
And a few of the youth were drawn to follow him, because old people he would not
draw close, because the elderly were already rooted in their many mistakes and
it is difficult to return them yet from their ways, just the youth were drawn
and ran/wanted to follow him. And he would go from city to city and they ran/wanted
to follow him. And their fathers and their wives would oppose them – against these
youth, because they said about them that they went out to a bad culture and
became apostates, to the extent that they extremely alienated them. To the
extent that some of the youth returned to their persuasions because of the
suffering they had from their homes, from their in-laws, and their father, and
their wives and so forth, and some of them remained by him and bonded to him.

And Abraham our forefather would engage abundantly in this,
to reveal the holy faith in the world. And he would compose very many books on
this, thousands of books. And he had many sons, and probably, since they were
his sons, they all went in the straight (-proper) path, because even Ishmael repented
(Bava Basra 16b). However, afterwards, when Abraham our forefather wanted to
leave over his books and his wisdom in the world, he analyzed and contemplated
to himself to which of his sons he should leave his books and his wisdom, until
he came to the decision to leave everything to Isaac our forefather, and he
gave over to him everything.

And afterwards, Isaac also went in this way, and he
converted many converts, and composed also very many books in the matter of
strengthening the holy faith. And he also contemplated to which of his sons he
should leave his books and his wisdom, because Esau as well was good in his
eyes, and misled him to the extent that he (-Isaac) loved him, as is explained
in the Scripture, as it says (Genesis 25), ‘And Isaac loved Esau because he was
a hunter with/for his mouth’, as Rashi explains there, that he would trick his
father with his words, and he (Esau) would ask him, ‘father, how does one tithe
salt’ etc.. But nevertheless, Isaac contemplated in his mind until it became clear
to him that the main thing is Jacob, and he gave over to him everything.

And so Jacob as well engaged in this, to draw the youth
close to Hashem Yisburach, and he composed many thousands of books in the
matter of the faith, because he composed a great many books in the matter of
the holy faith, a stupendous (-exaggerated) amount of books. And he learned
with all his sons the ways of the holy faith, because they were all tzadikim
(-righteous). But even still, he analyzed with his mind to whom to give over
all his wisdom, until he gave over all his wisdom to Levi. And to all of them
he gave over an outline (‘chapter headings’). And therefore the tribe of Levi
were bound and strong with the holy faith more than all of them. And therefore
the tribe of Levi did not err in the (golden) calf, and also they did not have
upon them any servitude of Egypt, because the tribe of Levi were strong in the
holy faith, more than all of them.

And afterwards he spoke about the matter of the remedy for a
person to merit to come to him after his passing etc. [and it is explained elsewhere
– previously in ‘New Stories’ at the end of article 21 (article 101).

 

403

Rabbi Nachman said: “My
Rosh Hashana is more important than everything.
So its wondrous to me, why my followers who do believe in me, so why don't they warn all those that are drawn to me, that
they should all be by me for Rosh Hashana, no one
is exempt. For my entire matter is just Rosh Hashana.
And he (Rabbi Nachman) warned that an announcement should
be broadcasted that whom so ever that is inclined to his directives
and is close to him, should be by him for Rosh Hashana, no one
should be missing. And whomever merits to be by him for Rosh Hashana
is befitting to be very very happy. 

 

 

404

Eat or don't eat, sleep
or don't sleep, pray or don't pray; just make sure
to be by me for Rosh Hashana!

 

 

405

My Rosh Hashana is a
great novelty. The Blessed G-d knows that this matter
isn't an inheritance from my fathers, just the Blessed G-d gave
me this as a present, that I know what Rosh Hashana is. Not only all
of you are completely contingent on my Rosh Hashana, even the whole
entire world is contingent on my Rosh Hashana.

 

 

430 - because
his way was not to be very stubborn over anything etc.[29]

 

 

436

When
he (Rabbi
Nachman) made known the matter of hisbodidus and conversing between
oneself and his Creator, our teacher, the rav, the
tzadik Rabbi Nussun zatza”l spoke
with him, and asked him: Behold a person has free choice (-
t.n.
so how can simply relating matters to Hashem effectuate the changes
which should be incumbent on the person himself to achieve)?
And
he did not answer him explicitly, just offhandedly, as if to say,
even still. That is to say, that is impossible to explain this matter to you completely, (and)
even
still it is necessary to practice this. And our teacher, Rabbi Nussun zatza”l, was not able
to question any further, because he knew that
this question could be asked also pertaining the prayers
that were already set for us by our Rabbis o.b.m. addressing repentance
and drawing close to Hashem Yisburach, like the blessing
“Hasheevainu” (-of the 18 benedictions, return us in repentance) and
so forth. (Life of Our Master Rabbi Nachman, article 436; And see below, article
93, what I brought down from the book Likutay Halachos, Choshen Mishpat, laws of deposit, law 3).

 

 

 

437

He
said:
It is good for a person to say during hisbodidus, when he is secluding
himself with his Creator, he should say: “Today I begin to
bind (divaikus) to
You.” And every time he should initiate a beginning, because all continuations
follow after the beginnings. And even the rationalist scientists
say that the beginning is paramount to half of the phenomenon
of the entire process. Consequently, either way he should make
a new start every time, and he should say as mentioned above,
for either way (mima nafshuch);
if
it was good before – now it will be better, and if Heaven forbid beforehand
it was not good – certainly it is necessary and incumbent
to launch a new beginning.

 

 

439

On
the
last Rosh Hashana (Jewish New Years)
in
Uman, his wise grandson, the son of his righteous daughter
Mistress Sara o.b.m., Master Israel, was by him.
And his grandson was still a young boy, three or four years old, and at that time Rabbainu's o.b.m. sickness was very
critical, for it was close to his passing away, for he
passed away right afterwards on Chol HaMoed (intermediate
days of)
Succos.
And Rabbainu o.b.m. said to his aforementioned grandson,
“Yisroel, pray for me to Hashem Yisburach that I should return
to my health.” He replied (to him),
“Give
me your watch and I will pray for you.” Rabbainu
o.b.m. responded, “Did you (plural – addressing everyone present)
see
that he is already a 'Good Jew' (an
appellation reference for a Chasidic Master), for
he is ordering that I give him an item in order that he
pray.” And he gave (it) to him. And the boy
took the watch, and he progressed and said these words,
“G-d, G-d, luz 

der 

zaide 

zayn gizund

.” And
the people standing there began to laugh. Rabbainu
o.b.m. responded, “This is the way necessary to beseech from
Hashem Yisburach, and how is there any other way to pray to Hashem
Yisburach?!” That is to say, that this is the main (method of) prayer
to Hashem Yisburach, with utter simplicity, like an infant
before his father, like a person speaks to his friend.

 

 

440

He
said,
even when one is unable to speak during hisbodidus, just the word
“Master of the World” alone, this is also very good.
(And see
above, article 2, elucidated that even the preparation alone,
that one prepares himself to speak but cannot speak at all, is also very good.)
And
he said, that it is possible to recognize on a person
if he does hisbodidus. (Life of Rabbi Nachman, article 440)
[And
regarding this see the Introduction and below article 58].

 

 

 

441

To
one
person, Rabbainu o.b.m. ordered that he should do hisbodidus, one period
in the day, and one period in the night. Once Rabbainu o.b.m.
asked one of his followers if he was accustomed to groaning and sighing, which is called
'krechtzin', when he
does hisbodidus. And he replied (to
him),
“yes.”
And Rabbainu o.b.m. said to him, “When I make a groan or a
sigh, if I am holding my hand on the table at the time of the sigh, then is it impossible afterwards for me to lift my hand
from the table, and I need to wait some time (hour) until
my strength is restored (see Brachos 58b, and Likutay Moharan 22 and 109, and in the
additional handwritten torahs published at the
end, Rabbainu uses the word NeNaCh - sighing). Once
Rabbainu o.b.m. grasped the rav, the tzaddik, Rabbi Shmuel
Isaac o.b.m. against his heart, and said to him, “Because of a
little blood such as this (i.e.
the vascular of the heart)
you
will abolish this world and the next world.” And in
Yiddish, “Ibber a bisselleh blit zulst
uhn verin dey velt uhn yenne velt; krechtz dus ois,” accustom yourself to sigh a
lot before Hashem Yisburach, until you are relieved of this
blood, and put down the evil in it, and you merit to the
aspect of (Psalms
109:22),
“And
my heart is hollow inside of me.” 

 

Once,
Rabbainu
o.b.m. spoke with Rav Yaakov Yosef regarding the service of Hashem,
as was his practice always, and he told him a parable of a king
who sent his son far away to learn wisdoms. Afterwards the son came
to the king's house erudite in all the wisdoms. Once, the king commanded
the son to take a certain extremely large stone (like a millstone)
and
carry it up to the higher floors of the house, and probably
the son was unable to carry and lift the stone,
because it was a very large and heavy stone. And the son was anguished for not being able to fulfill the desire of
his father the king, until the king revealed to
him afterwards his purport, and said to him, “Is it
conceivable to you that I would command you something so arduous
like this to take the stone as it is and carry it
and lift it; are you able to do such a thing with your great wisdom?!
Rather my entire intention was that you should take a sledgehammer
and bash and break apart the stone into small pieces,
and in this way you would be able to bring it up to the higher floor.” Similarly, Hashem Yisburach commanded us (Lamentations 3:41) that
we lift our hearts up to hands (stretched out) to G-d
in heaven, and our hearts are very large and heavy stone (heart), and
it is impossible to lift by any means, just, by taking a hammer,
which is speech, and through this it is possible to bust and break apart the heart of stone, and then we are able to lift
it to Hashem Yisburach, and understand (this).

 

Another time Rabbainu o.b.m. spoke about the
necessity to engage abundantly in the recital of
Psalms, and entreaties, and beseeching, and hisbodidus etc.. And
the rav, the tzaddik, Rabbi Yuddel zatza”l asked him, “How does one garner heart (meaning to say,
how does one merit that the words will be with
arousal of the heart)?” Rabbainu o.b.m. answered him,
“Tell me, by which tzaddik did you receive arousal of the heart?
The main thing is the speaking with the mouth,
words of entreaty and beseeching, and the arousal of the heart will come of itself.

 

 

442

 

To
one
of his greatest followers, in the youth of this follower he instructed
him, that during his hisbodidus he should speak a great deal
individually with all the limbs of his body, and he should explain
to them that all the desires of the body – (are)
emptiness,
for behold the end of every man is death, and the body is brought
to burial, and all the limbs will decay and rot etc., and additional
words similar to these. And he practiced this for some time,
and afterwards he spoke with Rabbainu o.b.m. and he apologized before
him that his body doesn't listen or feel whatsoever all his argumentation
and words with it. Rabbainu o.b.m. said to him, “be strong
in this matter and do not let up from this, and you will see afterwards
what will be from these words.” And he heeded his advice and
fulfilled his words, until he merited afterwards, that every single
limb which he spoke to individually was so drawn to his words,
to the extent that mamash (-actually) all
the life would leave the limb he was speaking with, and remained with
out any vitality or sensation. And this he saw empirically in his
external limbs such as his fingers and toes and so forth, until he
began to speak with his inner organs which are vital, such as the heart
and so forth, he needed to be very succinct in order that his life
wouldn't expire mamash,
as mentioned.

 

And
I
heard that once, this person spoke with those close to him about how
this world isn't anything, and what is the tachlis (-purpose,
end) of
all the matters of the body etc. as mentioned above, and in
the middle of speaking he fainted and began to
die (and in Yiddish: he remained weak),
and
with ardent effort he revived and returned to life. And
he said then that he merited through the holiness
of Rabbainu o.b.m. to this (spiritual) level
that whenever he reminds himself well of the fear of (Heavenly) retribution
and the end and the tachlis of
all the matters of this world, then all his limbs,
even the smallest of his toes, feel mamash like they are already lying (in the grave)
and
rotting etc., to the extent that he needs to greatly bolster
himself to retain his life inside of him, (so) that
his soul does not depart mamash, as mentioned above. And I
heard in the name of Rabbainu o.b.m. that he said to several other people as well, “Because your body is very coarse and
strong with desires, therefore darft
eer 
 un
dulen 

with
holy words regarding the tachlis.” And accordingly it is understood that it
is also necessary to speak with oneself at great length in the
matter of encouragement, so that he shouldn't abate
completely, Heaven forbid (And see above, article 16).
(Life of
Rabbi Nachman, article 442).

 

 

479 - by reading or hearing these stories we are drawn closer
to purer and more supernal realms, and we bond and gain attachment to the
tzadik, and we effect many more extremely valuable and important things[30]

 

 

499 - The way of the Baal Shem Tov was not to keep any money
from one day to the next, and even on his attempted voyage to Israel he kept
this practice. However, Rabbainu revealed that by the extremely great tzadikim
like our forefathers, they did in fact hold on to their money, and this was
even a bigger challenge for them

 

 

510 and 587

In
addition,
it is written in his holy words (article 275, see also Life of Rabbi Nachman 587),
that
it is good for a person, when he lies down in his
bed to sleep, to accustom himself to pour out his words
before Hashem Yisburach and to request from Him that
He draw him close to His service Blessed He. And if he doesn't merit
then to speak outright before Him Blessed He due to the preponderance
of his stone heart, in any event he should accustom himself
to sigh and groan, many groans continuously one after the other,
over his great distance from Hashem Yisburach and that he should
merit to draw close to Him Blessed He (Life of Rabbi Nachman 510, and see below article 47). And
it is already laid out in his holy book Likutay Moharan many
torahs (teachings;
8, 22:4, 56:9) what
one can merit through a holy sigh, see there.

 

 

 

514 - Rabbi Sholom Shachna of
Provisht, son of R' Avrohom Malach, son of the Maggid of Mezritch. He lived:
1769- 13 Tishray 1802, and Rabbainu spoke of the great darkness which came to
the world after his passing and which caused him stomach pains for three days (hashmatos of The Life of Our Leader Rabbi
Nachman, article 514). Rabbainu praised him as cited above and in
the The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 553 (see there in the additions, article 135, which
is from the introduction to Stories from Rabbi Moshe Glidman), and
elsewhere.

 

 

519

And this is what we see that this (person) has vast wealth, and this (other person) is poor and very poverty stricken
– all is from Him blessed He according to the becheera (free choice) of each and every one, as is
known (Words of Rabbi Nachman, article 300; Life
of Rabbi Nachman, article 519; see also Rabbi
Nachman's Legendary Stories, the beginning of the story
of the Prayer Leader), and (Psalm
145:17 – verse starting with the letter Tzadi – righteous (verse 16, which
begins with the letter Peh, is a culmination of verse 15,
expressing how Hashem actually satiates willfully)), 

 

 

526

(And someone
who prays with the kavanos (intentions) of
the Kabbala for the words of the prayer, and he is not worthy of this,
it is a great defect etc. (Words of Rabbi Nachman articles 75 and 249; Life of Rabbi Nachman
526, avodas Hashem – the service of
Hashem 83),
see
there).

 

 

537

He
said regarding the renown leader whom are fraudulent; because upon the ‘bal
duvur’ (litigator – Satan) it is very difficult to labor with the entire world
to mislead them from the straight (-upright) way, therefore he placed one
renown leader in a certain place and one renown leader in a certain place

 

 

538

He
said regarding the men of his persuasion, that it is difficult for them to
elevate themselves to lead with rabbinate and superiority, because I imbued
them with abundant truth, more than sufficient

 

 

539 that Rabbainu said that were he to have a tzadik worthy
of making a pidyon for him, he would give him a pidyon every day
and every time, see there.

 

 

545

Additionaly
it
is brought down there (Life of Rabbi Nachman, article 545),
that
once, our teacher the rav, Rabbi Nussun zatza”l said to our Master and Leader,
Rabbainu Hakadosh (-the
holy) zatza”l, complaining (Psalms 69:4), “I
have become exhausted with my calling out (to You),
my
throat has become parched (hoarse), my
eyes longing disappointed, hoping to my G-d.” And our Master and Leader,
Rabbainu zatza”l lifted his hands
slightly and said in a soft tone, “If so, what can be
done?” That is to say, for certainly it is
forbidden to have suspicion of Him Blessed He, and certainly
Hashem is righteous. Afterwards he (Rabbi Nachman)
said
to him, “Behold, if King David r.i.p. said, 'I have
exhausted myself with my calling out (to You),
my
throat has become parched (hoarse)', it
literally was so, that he had called out so much until he was mamash (-actually) fatigued
and exhausted with his calling, and his throat was mamash parched (hoarse), literally,
but you, thank G-d, are still strong etc..

 

546

He spoke about the matter of the battles of the kings who
war one on another for some sort of conquest, and they spill a lot of blood
baselessly etc.. And he said that already many fallacies were voided from the
world, what they were mistaken and confused about in the early generations
[like the matters of idolatries which they slaughtered their children to Molech
and so forth, many matters of fallacies which abounded in the early
generations], and now many fallacies were voided, but this mistake and this
confusion of wars has still not been nullified. And he would mock their wise
men, and he said in an expression of scoffing, that they are great scholars and
they contemplate and analyze with their wisdom how to make wondrous weapons
which can kill thousands of souls in one instant, is there a greater fallacy
than this, to eradicate and to kill many souls baselessly?

 

553 - Of
Medzhybizh, the grandson of the Baal Shem Tov, and the uncle of Rabbainu. He
lived: 5517/1757-5571/1811 (R.A.K.). Rabbainu praised him
profusely in The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 553 and numerous other
places.

 

 

569

Rabbi
Nussun writes that Rabbi Nachman told him how a person came over to him
complaining bitterly about how terrible he is, and that despite years of
attempting to better himself and draw close to Hashem Yisburach, he is still so
terrible. Rabbi Nachman replied to this person, "I have no one to talk to,
because you are already completely bad." The person immediately was
aroused and answered, "But behold even still sometimes I surmount to draw
myself to the holiness of an Israelite etc.." To this Rabbainu replied,
"That is a little bit." And Rabbainu immediately instructed him to go
with the Torah-lesson of Azamru. Rabbi Nussun writes that he understood
Rabbainu's intention, that precisely in this way Rabbainu was able to revivify
this person who had fallen so far that nothing could revitalize him, only by
pronouncing him to be completely lost and bad, by this the person came around
on his own, and began to realize the holiness of some of the good points that
he did in fact have, and then Rabbainu directed him to practice the
Torah-lesson Azamru.

 

593

The main thing is to be
happy always, and one should make himself happy however
possible, usually this is only attainable though foolish things,
to act as if he is crazy and do silly funny things or to jump around
and dance, in order to come to happiness which is a very great thing. [Life of Rabbi Nachman 593; Likutay
Moharan 24, 48]

 

 

Addendums:

 

Moharna"t (acronym for: Our Teacher HaRav 

Nussun) asked Rabbainu za.tza.l. why he conceals himself (-his greatness) from
before the Rav of Berdichev. And he replied, "To draw close to me, he
cannot, except if he kindles the pipe for me, and this is not possible!"[31]

 

[1] The
Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 15.

[2] On
the Jewish New Years of the year 5567 (which fell out on Saturday and Sunday –
1807), Rabbi Nachman gave over a teaching in which he revealed the concept,
source, root, and power of stories from Ancient Time (this awesome discourse is
recorded in Likutay Moharan – A Collection of the Teachings of Our Master Rabbi
Nachman, Torah-teaching 60. In the summer preceding, Rabbi Nachman had begun to
reveal the stories, and had told over the first story of the Loss of a
Princess).

[3] The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 46 and 229, and
elsewhere.

[4]
Rabbainu wrote to Saba Yisroel, in the holy Petek, that this exclamation was
referring to him.

[5] See
Sichos HuRan – Words of Rabbi Nachman 173-4 and The Life of Our Leader Rabbi
Nachman 55.

[6] This
can mean internally, within the body, and externally, on the body surface, and
it can also mean both types of pain, physical and mental anguish. R.A.K.
referenced here The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman, article 115, where
Rabbainu said he suffered double hell in his two years in Zlotipolia, this is
referring I think mainly to the adversary that he had there. R.A.K. also
referenced here to Yimay Moharnat – The Days of Our Teacher Rabbi Nussun,
article 11, where shortly after the death of Rabbainu's son, Rabbainu spoke of
enormous pain and suffering he has from all sides, from both within and
outside, and it continues to explain there, within, refers to his severe
sickness and other excruciating pain, and outside, refers to the tremendous
adversary against him for no reason, besides for all types of other pain that
he was constantly enduring, see there.

[7] The
Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 134.

[8] The
Talmud in Kesuvos (111a) says that one who walks
four cubits in the Land of Israel is a ben (-affiliate-worthy)
of the future world (R.A.K.). Rambam, Laws of Kings
and Their Wars 5:11. The Arizal revealed special Kabalistic intentions to have
– Shaar HaKavanos, Drushay HaAmida 2 on the word Elokaynu. And see Likutay
Moharan 116 and 129. Likutay Halachos, Orach Chaim, Laws of Blessings on Fruit
4:4. The Ohr Hachaim (Deuteronomy 3) says that this is
what Moshe Rabbainu prayed for. See also Zimras Hu'uretz (by
Rabbi Nachman of Tcherin) ends of 4, 5, 21, 2:39 and 18, 24,
2:40.

[9] See The Life of Our Leader Rabbi
Nachman 142. And see Parporu'oas Lichuchmu and Ebay Hanachal on Likutay
Moharan volume 2, Torah 78, And see Likutay Moharan 54 [Here
Rabbainu reveals something that tzadikim do which normal people cannot but
nevertheless they effectuate it by wearing talis and tefilin], (R.A.K.).

[10] The
Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 175.

[11] On
the night of Shabbos Nachamu (-consolation, the Shabbos after the grieving of
the 9th of Av) 5570/1810, The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 215.
Yimay Moharnat, vol. 1 article 51.

[12]
See The Life of Our
Leader Rabbi Nachman 215.

[13]
Rabbainu travelled there about three years before his passing, and he was
extremely sick there and almost passed away there.

[14]
R.A.K. references specifically to The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman, article
223.

[15] This
is also brought down in The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman, article 232. This
needs further study because the Talmud (Sanhedrin 107a)
teaches that one should not ask to be tested, and perhaps the answer Rabbi
Nachman provided (see the last footnote on article 15 )
regarding his making vows that it was referring only to shlimazels applies to
this as well, because even though the Talmud says that even King David erred in
this, the Talmud also says that King David's error was only to serve as a
lesson that one can repent, therefore there is room to say that one who is
absolutely certain of himself would be permitted (Likutay
Nanach 590:5, and see there in the Remazim 443).

Also see the commentary of Bayur Halikutim on
Likutay Moharan 22, who deals with this question.

[16] The
Talmud (Sotah 3) in fact asserts that a
person only sins because of a spirit of fallacy which enters him, and see the
first Torah-teaching of Likutay Moharan which asserts that the evil inclination
seeks to make a person crazy, literally (Also see Avunehu Barzel,
Words and Stories of Rabbainu 62).

[17] Also
see Sichos HuRan – Words of Rabbi Nachman, article 51, that the intellect of a
person can stand up against all the desires, and also in Likutay Moharan,
volume 2, Torah-teaching 8, that the three minds which are correspond and are
acquired by the three daily prayers, are partitions which keep the desires out.

[18] This
is also brought down in The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman, article 233, and
Rabbi Nussun writes in Likutay Halachos (Orach Chaim, Nefeelas Apayim
6:8) that he heard from Rabbainu, that when a person is tested he
is deprived of his daas (-realization of knowledge)
for other it would not be a test, as Rabbainu explains here, and in Likutay
Moharan (72) that when a person has clear
daas no temptation can sway him.

[19] This
technique is explained in Sichos HuRan – Words of Rabbi Nachman article 16, and
see also The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman, article 241.

[20] See the parable this is referring
to in The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman, article 260.

[21]
See all of this in Likutay Moharan, Torah-teaching 147, and also see
Torah-teaching 4:7. And see The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 269 and 276.

[22]
Sichos HuRan – Words of Rabbi Nachman 3, Yimay Moharnat vol. 1 article 51, The
Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 282-3.

[23] It is
fascinating to note that in The Praises of Rabbi Nachman, part 2, which records
the highlights of Rabbainu’s voyage to Israel, including the different tombs of
tzadikim he visited, it does not mention that he visited the tomb of the Arizal
even though Rabbainu was in Tsfas (-Safed).

[24] One
of the classics of the Ramak. Pardess means orchard, alluding to the field of
the esoteric. It is also acronym for all of the four main categories of the
study of the Torah (pshat, remez, drush, soad).

[25]
These adjectives are found in the blessing said after the Shema in the morning
prayer.

[26] The
Ramchal actually explains very simply, clearly, and succinctly that the Ramak
spoke only in general terms of the Sefiros, whereas the Arizal spoke of their
particular qualities as they are manifested in the Partzufim (countenances).
See Klach Pischay Chuchmuh – 138 Gates of Wisdom, Gateway 17, and Maamar
HaVeekuach (Exposition of Disputation, published in the beginning of Shaaray
Ramchal), articles 83-4. Probably Rabbi Nussun did not have access to most of
the manuscripts of the Ramchal. It is also probable that even if he had he
would still have chosen to conceal the matter and keep the difference amorphous
and obscure, for in this way the holy methods retain strong allure and appeal,
and they are not reduced to a slotted cold classification. Nevertheless from
here we can gain insight into the important role the Ramchal can play in
providing much groundwork and background to the holy teachings of Rabbainu. The
connection between the Ramchal and Rabbainu is well established and elaborated
upon in Likutay Nanach and elsewhere.

[27]
Printed in Sichos Huran – The Words of Rabbi Nachman, article 128.

[28]
There is a custom to read the entire Tikunay Zohar during the month of Elul
until Yom Kippur. See Sichos Huran – The Words of Rabbi Nachman, article 127.

[29]
There is actually an entire section in The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman,
dedicated to this principle, articles 430-435, and see there article 222. Yimay
Moharnat (The Days of Our Teacher Rabbi Nussun)
39; Avunehu Barzel, Words and Stories of Rabbainu o.b.m. 18 (R.A.K.).

[30] See
Likutay Moharan, Torah-teachings 60, 234, and 248, and Sefer Hamidos (published in English under the title: Character),
Clothing 2:1, Thoughts 4, Messiah 2:1, Tzadik 157, 174, 186, 2:1, and The Life
of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman 479, and Likutay Tefilos 105.

[31] Siach Sarfay Kodesh (5:52) has a
slightly different version, and actually offers an original quotation of the
Yiddish words Rabbainu reputedly said (I'm not sure if this makes it more
reliable…) – Rabbainu said that if he wanted to reveal himself (-at large), the
gadol hador (-greatest Rabbi of the generation) would have to attend to him and
bring forth the fiery coal and kindle his pipe, and this cannot possibly
happen.

Further insight into this
can be drawn from the third addendum to The Life of Our Leader Rabbi Nachman
which recounts how Rabbainu's grandfather, Rabbi Nachman of Hordenka lit the
pipe of the Bal Shem Tov, fully prostrating himself in the process, his sister
was very disturbed by this, and he told her, "What can I tell you of his
greatness? If you would know of his greatness you would say he was the Holy One
Blessed He, Himself, but I, having more daas (realization of knowledge) than
you, I know that he serves the Holy One Blessed He."